Whoopi Goldberg (/hwpi/, born Caryn Elaine Johnson; November 13, 1955) is an American comedian, actress, singer-songwriter, political activist, author and talk show host.Goldberg made her film debut in The Color Purple (1985), playing Celie, a mistreated black woman in the Deep South. She received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actress and won her first Golden Globe Award for her role in the film. In 1990, she starred as Oda Mae Brown, a psychic helping a slain man (Patrick Swayze) find his killer in the blockbuster film Ghost. This performance won her a second Golden Globe and an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. Notable later films include Sister Act and Sister Act 2, The Lion King, Made in America, How Stella Got Her Groove Back, Girl, Interrupted and Rat Race. She is also acclaimed for her roles as the bartender Guinan in Star Trek: The Next Generation and as Terry Doolittle in Jumpin' Jack Flash. More recently, she had performed the voice of Stretch in Toy Story 3 and made an appearance in Glee as Carmen Tibideaux.Goldberg has been nominated for 13 Emmy Awards for her work in television. She was co-producer of the popular game show Hollywood Squares from 1998 to 2004. She has been the moderator of the daytime talk show The View since 2007. Goldberg has a Grammy, two Emmys, two Golden Globes, a Tony (for production, not acting), and an Oscar. In addition, Goldberg has a British Academy Film Award, four People's Choice Awards, and has been honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. All of this has made her one of the most accomplished actors of her generation, and she is one of the few entertainers who have won an Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, and Tony Award.Goldberg was born Caryn Elaine Johnson in Manhattan and raised in the Chelsea neighborhood, the daughter of Emma (ne Harris), a nurse and teacher, and Robert James Johnson, Jr., a clergyman.[1][2] Goldberg has described her mother as a "stern, strong, and wise woman" who raised her as a single mother after Goldberg's father had left the family.[3] Goldberg's recent ancestors migrated north from Faceville, Georgia, Palatka, Florida, and Virginia.[4] Results of a DNA test, revealed in the 2006 PBS documentary African American Lives, traced part of her ancestry to the Papel and Bayote people of modern-day Guinea-Bissau. Her admixture test indicates that she is 92percent of sub-Saharan African origin and 8percent of European origin.[5][6]Her stage name, Whoopi, was taken from a whoopee cushion; she has stated that "If you get a little gassy, you've got to let it go. So people used to say to me, 'You're like a whoopee cushion.' And that's where the name came from."[7][8] She adopted the traditionally German/Jewish surname Goldberg as a stage name because her mother felt the original surname of Johnson was not "Jewish enough" to make her a star.[9] According to an anecdote told by Nichelle Nichols in the documentary film Trekkies, a young Goldberg was watching Star Trek, and upon seeing Nichols' character Uhura, exclaimed, "Momma! There's a black lady on TV and she ain't no maid!"[10] This spawned lifelong fandom of Star Trek for Goldberg, who would eventually accept a recurring guest-starring role on Star Trek: The Next Generation.Between the years of 1979 and 1981, she lived in socialist East Germany, working in a number of theater productions. During her travels, she would smuggle various items into the country for the artists she stayed with.[11]Goldberg trained under famed acting teacher Uta Hagen at the HB Studio. She first appeared onscreen in 198182 in Citizen: I'm Not Losing My Mind, I'm Giving It Away, an avant-garde ensemble feature by San Francisco filmmaker William Farley. Goldberg created The Spook Show, a one-woman show composed of different character monologues, in 1983. Director Mike Nichols was instantly impressed and offered to take the show to Broadway. The self-titled show ran from October 24, 1984 to March 10, 1985 for a total of 156 sold-out performances. While on Broadway, Goldberg's performance caught the eye of director Steven Spielberg. He was about to direct the film The Color Purple, based on Pulitzer Prize-winning novel by Alice Walker. Having read the novel, she was ecstatic at being offered a lead role in her first motion picture. Goldberg received compliments on her acting from Spielberg, Walker, and music consultant Quincy Jones. The Color Purple was released in late 1985, and was a critical and commercial success. It was later nominated for 11 Academy Awards including a nomination for Goldberg as Best Actress. The film did not win any of its Academy Award nominations, but Goldberg won the Golden Globe Award.Goldberg starred in Penny Marshall's directorial debut, Jumpin' Jack Flash, and began a relationship with David Claessen, a director of photography on the set, and the couple married later that year. The film was a success, and during the next two years, three additional motion pictures featured Goldberg, Burglar, Fatal Beauty, and The Telephone. Though not as successful as her prior motion pictures, Goldberg still garnered awards from the NAACP Image Awards. Claessen and Goldberg divorced after the box office failure of The Telephone, which Goldberg was under contract to star in. She tried to sue the producers of the film, to no avail. The 1988 movie, Clara's Heart, was critically acclaimed, and featured a young Neil Patrick Harris. As the 1980s concluded, she participated in the numerous HBO specials of Comic Relief with fellow comedians Robin Williams and Billy Crystal.In January 1990, Goldberg starred with Jean Stapleton in the TV situation comedy Bagdad Cafe. The show ran for two seasons on CBS. Simultaneously, Goldberg starred in The Long Walk Home, portraying a woman in the Civil Rights Movement. She played a psychic in the 1990 film Ghost, and became the first black female to win the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in nearly 50 years, and only the second black female in Oscar history to win an acting award.[citation needed] Premiere Magazine named her character, Oda Mae Brown, to the list of Top 100 best film characters of all time.[12]Goldberg starred in Soapdish and had a recurring role on Star Trek: The Next Generation as Guinan, which she would reprise in two Star Trek movies. On May 29, 1992, Sister Act was released. The motion picture grossed well over US$200 million and Goldberg was nominated for a Golden Globe. Next, she starred in Sarafina!. During the next year, she hosted a late-night talk show, The Whoopi Goldberg Show and starred in two more motion pictures Made in America and Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit. From 1994 to 1995, Whoopi appeared in Corrina, Corrina, The Lion King (voice), The Pagemaster (voice), Boys on the Side, and Moonlight and Valentino. Goldberg became the first African-American female to host the Academy Awards in 1994. She hosted the Awards again in 1996, 1999, and 2002. Goldberg released four motion pictures in 1996: Bogus (with Gerard Depardieu and Haley Joel Osment), Eddie, The Associate (with Dianne Wiest) and Ghosts of Mississippi (with Alec Baldwin and James Woods). During the filming of Eddie, Goldberg began dating co-star Frank Langella, a relationship which lasted until early 2000. In October 1997, Goldberg and ghostwriter Daniel Paisner, cowrote Book, a collection featuring insights and opinions.[13][clarification needed] In November and December 2005, Goldberg revived her one-woman show on Broadway at the Lyceum Theatre in honor of its 20th anniversary.From 1998 to 2001, Goldberg took supporting roles in the How Stella Got Her Groove Back with Angela Basset, Girl, Interrupted with Winona Ryder and Angelina Jolie, Kingdom Come, and Rat Race with an all-star ensemble cast. She also played the voice of Liz on the first four seasons of popular PBS program The Magic Schoolbus. She starred in the successful ABC-TV versions of Cinderella, A Knight in Camelot, and the TNT Original Movie Call Me Claus. In 1998, she gained a new audience when she became the "Center Square" on Hollywood Squares, hosted by Tom Bergeron. She also served as Executive Producer, for which she was nominated for 4 Emmys.[14] She left the show in 2002, and the "Center Square" was filled in with celebrities for the last two on-air seasons without Goldberg. In 2003, Goldberg returned to television, starring in the NBC comedy, Whoopi, which was canceled after one season. On her 48th birthday, Goldberg was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Goldberg also appeared along side Samuel Jackson and Angela Bassett in the HBO special Unchained Memories, narrating slave narratives. During the next two years, she became a spokeswoman for Slim Fast and produced two television sitcoms: Lifetime's original drama Strong Medicine that ran for six seasons and Whoopi's Littleburg, a Nickelodeon show for younger children. Goldberg made guest appearances on Everybody Hates Chris, as an elderly character named Louise Clarkson. She produced the Noggin sitcom Just For Kicks, in early 2006. She was a guest at Elton John's 60th birthday bash and concert at Madison Square Garden on March 25, 2007.On September 4, 2007, Goldberg became the new moderator and co-host of The View, replacing Rosie O'Donnell.[15] O'Donnell stated on her official blog that she wanted Goldberg to be moderator. Goldberg's debut as moderator drew 3.4 million viewers, 1 million fewer than O'Donnell's debut ratings. After two weeks, however, The View was averaging 3.5 million total viewers under Goldberg, a 7% increase from 3.3 million under O'Donnell the previous season.[16]Goldberg's first appearance on the show was controversial when she made statements about Michael Vick's dogfighting as being "part of his cultural upbringing" and "not all that unusual" in parts of the South.[17][18] Another comment that stirred controversy was the statement that the Chinese "have a very different relationship to cats" and that "you and I would be very pissed if somebody ate kitty."[19] Some defended Goldberg, including her co-host Elisabeth Hasselbeck, saying that her comments were taken out of context by the press, because she repeated several times that she did not condone what Vick did.[20]On more than one occasion, Goldberg has expressed strong disagreement and irritation with different remarks made by Elisabeth Hasselbeck, such as on October 3, 2007, when Hasselbeck commented that Hillary Clinton's proposed US$ 5,000 baby entitlement might lead to fewer abortions because of women wanting to keep the money.[21][22]Goldberg also created controversy when on September 28, 2009, during a discussion of Roman Polanski's case, she opined that Polanski's rape of a thirteen year old in 1977[23][24] was not "rape-rape".[25] Goldberg later clarified that she had intended to highlight the exact charge brought against Polanski, namely statutory rape, i.e. "unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor", rather than rape with an unwilling participant.[26] Polanski had been initially charged with "rape by use of drugs, perversion, sodomy, lewd and lascivious act upon a child under 14, and furnishing a controlled substance to a minor",[27] but under a plea bargain, Polanski pleaded guilty to "unlawful sexual intercourse with a minor" with the graver charges dropped,[28][29][30] before fleeing to France, hours before he was to be formally sentenced.[27]After comedienne Kathy Griffin referred to Massachusetts Senator Scott Brown's daughters as "prostitutes", Goldberg said that if anyone insulted her daughter like that then "I would beat their ass." The audience reacted with shock, and support.[31][32]Goldberg performed the role of Califia, the radiant Queen of the Island of California, for a theater presentation called Golden Dreams at Disney California Adventure Park, the second gate at the Disneyland Resort, in 2000. The show, which explains the history of the Golden State (California), opened on February 8, 2001, with the rest of the park. Golden Dreams closed in September 2008 to make way for the upcoming Little Mermaid ride planned for DCA.In 2001, Goldberg hosted the 50th Anniversary of I Love Lucy, a 50s black-and-white sitcom, celebrating the legacy of Lucille Ball, Desi Arnaz, Vivian Vance, and William Frawley.[citation needed]Goldberg hosted the 2001 documentary short, The Making of A Charlie Brown Christmas. In July 2006, Goldberg became the main host of the Universal Studios Hollywood Backlot Tour, in which she appears multiple times in video clips shown to the guests on monitors placed on the trams.Along with her many contributions to film and television and her major impact on this industry, Whoopi Goldberg was a main narrator for HBO's 2003 film, Unchained Memories.Goldberg made a guest appearance on the hit television show 30 Rock, in which she played herself. She is shown as endorsing her own workout video. In Season 4 of the show, Goldberg counsels Tracy Jordan on winning the "EGOT", the coveted combination of Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, and Tony awards.Goldberg was involved in controversy in July 2004 when, at a fundraiser for John Kerry at Radio City Music Hall in New York, Goldberg made a sexual joke about President George W. Bush, by waving a bottle of wine, pointing toward her pubic area and saying: "We should keep Bush where he belongs, and not in the White House." Slim-Fast, took exception to these comments made by Goldberg and dropped her from the then current ad campaign.[33]From August 2006 to March 2008, Goldberg hosted Wake Up With Whoopi, a nationally syndicated morning radio talk and entertainment program.In October 2007, Goldberg announced on the air that she would be retiring from acting because she is no longer sent scripts, saying, "You know, there's no room for the very talented Whoopi. There's no room right now in the marketplace of cinema".[34]On July 14, 2008, Goldberg announced on The View that from July 29 to September 7, she would perform in the Broadway musical Xanadu.On November 13, 2008, Goldberg's birthday, she announced live on The View that she would be producing, along with Stage Entertainment, the premiere of Sister Act: The Musical at the London Palladium. The show began on Wednesday, May 6, 2009, with the official press night on June 2, 2009. The show featured actress Sheila Hancock and Patina Miller, amongst others.She also gave a short message at the beginning of the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2008 wishing all the participants good luck, and stressing the importance of UNICEF, the official charity of the Junior Eurovision Song Contest.[35]Since its launch in 2008, Goldberg has been a contributor for wowOwow.com, a new website for women to talk culture, politics and gossip.[36]Goldberg has also been an advocate for human rights worldwide, moderating a panel at the Alliance of Youth Movements Summit[37] on how social networks can be used to fight violent extremism[38] in 2008, and also moderating a panel at the UN in 2009[39] on human rights, children and armed conflict, terrorism, human rights and reconciliation.On December 13, 2008, Goldberg guest starred on The Naked Brothers Band, a Nickelodeon rock- mockumentary television show. Before the episode premiered, on February 18, 2008, the band performed on The View and the band members were interviewed by Goldberg and Sherri Shepherd.On December 18 through 20, 2009, Goldberg performed in the Candlelight Processional at Epcot in Walt Disney World. She was given a standing ovation during her final performance for her reading of the Christmas story and her tribute to the guest choirs performing in the show with her.[citation needed]She also makes a guest appearance in Michael Jackson's short film for the single "Liberian Girl".She made an appearance on the seventh season of the cooking reality show Hell's Kitchen by Gordon Ramsay where she was a special guest sitting at the chef's table in the kitchen where she was served by the contestants.[citation needed]On January 14, 2010, Goldberg made a one-night-only appearance at the Minskoff Theatre to perform in the mega-hit musical The Lion King.[citation needed]Goldberg made her West End debut as the Mother Superior in musical version of Sister Act for a limited engagement set for August 1031, 2010,[40] but prematurely left the cast on August 27, to be with her family; her mother had suffered from a severe stroke.[41] However, she returned to the cast for five performances.[42] The show closed on October 30, 2010.[43]In 2012, Goldberg guest starred as Jane Marsh, Sue Heck's guidance counselor in the TV series, The Middle.[citation needed]Later that year, she played a bit part in an independent short film by David Carter entitled "Indecisive".[44]Goldberg has been married three times in 1973 to Alvin Martin (divorced in 1979, one daughter), in 1986 to cinematographer David Claessen (divorced in 1988), and in 1994 to the actor Lyle Trachtenberg (divorced in 1995).[citation needed] She has also been romantically linked with actors Frank Langella and Ted Danson.[citation needed]In 1973, when Goldberg was eighteen, she and Alvin Martin had one daughter, Alexandrea (now an actress and producer who has used the stage names Alex Martin and Alex Dean). Goldberg became a grandmother at the age of thirty-four when her then sixteen year-old daughter gave birth to her daughter, Amarah Skye. And through Alvin, Goldberg has another two grandchildren who are six and nine years younger than Amarah.[45]On August 29, 2010, Goldberg's mother Emma Johnson died after suffering a stroke.[46][47] Goldberg left London at the time, where she had been performing in Sister Act the Musical, but returned to perform on October 22, 2010.She has admitted publicly to having been a "high functioning" drug addict years ago, at one point being too terrified to even leave her bed to go use the toilet.[48] Goldberg suffers from dyslexia.[49]Goldberg currently lives in the gated community of Llewellyn Park in West Orange, New Jersey, near Glenmont, the home of inventor Thomas Edison. Her house was built in 1920 and has 23 rooms.[50]Goldberg has received two Academy Award nominations, for The Color Purple and Ghost, winning for Ghost. She is the first African American to have received Academy Award nominations for both Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress. She is the recipient of the 1985 Drama Desk Award for Outstanding One-Person Show for her solo performance on Broadway. She has received eight Daytime Emmy nominations, winning two. She has received five (non-daytime) Emmy nominations. She has received three Golden Globe nominations, winning two. She won a Grammy Award in 1985 and a Tony Award as a producer of the Broadway musical Thoroughly Modern Millie. She has won three People's Choice Awards. In 1999, she received the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation Vanguard Award for her continued work in supporting the gay and lesbian community. She has been nominated for five American Comedy Awards with two wins. In 2001, she won the prestigious Mark Twain Prize for American Humor at the Kennedy Center as well as the Women in Film Crystal Award for outstanding women who, through their endurance and the excellence of their work, have helped to expand the role of women within the entertainment industry.[51] In 2009, Goldberg won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Talk Show Host for her role on The View. She shares the award with co-hosts Joy Behar, Sherri Shepherd, Elisabeth Hasselbeck and Barbara Walters.Goldberg is one of few to win an Oscar, a Grammy, a Tony, and an Emmy. She has been seen in over 150 films, and during a period in the 1990s, Whoopi was the highest-paid actress of all time. Her humanitarian efforts include working for Comic Relief, recently reuniting with Billy Crystal and Robin Williams for the 20th Anniversary of Comic Relief.In February 2002, Goldberg sent her Oscar statuette from Ghost to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to be cleaned and replated. During this time, the statuette was taken from its shipping container, and later retrieved by the shipping company, UPS.[52]In 1990, Whoopi was officially named an honorary member of the Harlem Globetrotters exhibition basketball team by the members.[53]She was awarded the Hans Christian Andersen Award for outstanding achievement by a dyslexic in 1987.[49]Goldberg once held the title as the highest paid actress of all time, it is reported that her salary for Sister Act 2: Back in the Habit in 1993 was $7 to 12 million and is the highest paid for an actress at the time.[54]On April 1, 2010, Whoopi Goldberg joined Cyndi Lauper in the launch of her Give a Damn campaign to bring a wider awareness of discrimination of the LGBT community. The campaign is to bring straight people to ally with the gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender community. Other names included in the campaign are Jason Mraz, Elton John, Judith Light, Cynthia Nixon, Kim Kardashian, Clay Aiken, Sharon Osbourne, and Kelly Osbourne.[55] On an airing of The View on May 9, 2012, Whoopi stated that she is a Member of the National Rifle Association.[56]1 Early life2 Career

2.1 Early work
2.2 A comedic and dramatic balance
2.3 The View
2.4 Other media appearances

2.1 Early work2.2 A comedic and dramatic balance2.3 The View2.4 Other media appearances3 Personal life4 Awards and honors5 Activism6 Filmography

6.1 Film
6.2 Television

6.1 Film6.2 Television7 Discography8 Bibliography9 See also10 References11 Further reading12 External links2.1 Early work2.2 A comedic and dramatic balance2.3 The View2.4 Other media appearances6.1 Film6.2 TelevisionWhoopi Goldberg: Direct from Broadway (1985)Television Parts (1985)Moonlighting (1986)Carol, Carl, Whoopi, and Robin (1987)Whoopi Goldberg: Fontaine... Why Am I Straight? (1988) (also writer)Pee-wee's Playhouse Christmas Special (guest star 1988)Star Trek: The Next Generation (recurring guest star from 1988 to 1993 as Guinan)My Past Is My Own (1989)Kiss Shot (1989)Tales from the Whoop: Hot Rod Brown Class Clown (1990)Bagdad Cafe (19901991)Tales from the Crypt (Dead Wait) (1991)Captain Planet and the Planeteers (19901993) (voice)Defenders of Dynatron City (1992) (voice)A Different World (Season 4, Episode 92) (1991) (professor)The Whoopi Goldberg Show (19921993)Yuletide in the 'hood (1993) (voice)The Nanny (1993; 1999) (herself and a Marriage photographer)A Cool Like That Christmas (1994) (voice)Denver the Last Dinosaur (1994) (voice)The Sunshine Boys (1995) (Cameo)Happily Ever After: Fairy Tales for Every Child (19951999) (voice).Zevo 3 as Grams (2010present) .Mother Goose: A Rappin' and Rhymin' Special (1997) (voice)Rodgers and Hammerstein's Cinderella (1997)A Knight in Camelot (1998)The Hollywood Squares (center square from 1998 to 2002) (also producer)Alice in Wonderland (1999)Our Friend, Martin (1999) (voice)Jackie's Back (1999)Foxbusters (19992000) (voice)Celebrity Dish (2000)Whose Line Is It Anyway? (2000)The Magical Legend of the Leprechauns (1999)What Makes a Family (2001) (also executive producer)Call Me Claus (2001) (also executive producer)Ms. Clavel: My Fair Madeline (2002) (voice)It's a Very Merry Muppet Christmas Movie (2002)Absolutely Fabulous  "Gay", Christmas special (2002)Celebrity Deathmatch Herself in the episode "Celebrity Deathmatch Special Report"The Disco Ball (2003)Good Fences (2003) (also producer)Whoopi (20032004) (also executive producer)Littleburg (2004) (canceled after five episodes)Whoopi: Back to Broadway  The 20th Anniversary (2005) (also executive producer and writer)Just for Kicks (2006) (developer and executive producer)Dawn French's Girls Who Do Comedy (2006) (three part British TV series)Law & Order: Criminal Intent (2006)Everybody Hates Chris (2006)30 Rock (20072009)The View (2007present) (moderator/co-host)Snow Buddies (2008)A Muppet Christmas: Letters to Santa (2008)Life on Mars (2008) (uncredited cameo)Meerkat Manor: The Story Begins (2008) (narrator)Friday Night with Jonathan Ross (2009) (star guest)Loose Women (2009) (star guest)The Justin Lee Collins Show (2009) (star guest)GMTV (2009) (star guest)The Electric Company (2009) (star guest)The Cleaner (2009) PK A sponsor for NAHell's Kitchen (2010) Special GuestThe Middle (2012)Glee (2012-Pres.) Carmen TibideauxSuburgatory (2012) Voice of Yakult1985: Whoopi: Original Broadway Recording1988: Whoopi Goldberg: Fontaine... Why Am I Straight?1992: Sister Act  Soundtrack1993: Sister Act 2  Soundtrack2005: Whoopi: The 20th Anniversary ShowGoldberg, Whoopi (1992). Alice. New York: Bantam Books. ISBN0-553-08990-0.Goldberg, Whoopi (1997). Book. New York: R. Weisbach Books. ISBN0-688-15252-X.Goldberg, Whoopi (2006). Whoopi's Big Book of Manners. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. ISBN0-7868-5295-X.Goldberg, Whoopi (2008). Sugar Plum Ballerinas #1: Plum Fantastic. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. ISBN1-4231-1173-7.Goldberg, Whoopi (2009). Sugar Plum Ballerinas #2: Toeshoe Trouble. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. ISBN1-4231-1913-4.Goldberg, Whoopi (2010). Sugar Plum Ballerinas #3: Perfectly Prima. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. ISBN1-4231-2054-X.Goldberg, Whoopi (October 2010). Sugar Plum Ballerinas #4: Terrible Terrel. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. ISBN1-4231-2082-5.Goldberg, Whoopi (October 2010). Is It Just Me? Or Is It Nuts Out There?. New York: Hyperion. ISBN1-4013-2384-7.Goldberg, Whoopi (March 2011). Sugar Plum Ballerinas #5: CATastrophe. New York: Hyperion Books for Children. ISBN1-4231-2083-3.Goldberg, Whoopi (October 2012). Whoopi Goldberg; Inside The Whoopi Cushion. Los Angeles: Little People Books. ISBN1-4231-2084-1.List of persons who have won Academy, Emmy, Grammy, and Tony AwardsList of Black Academy Award winners and nomineesList of Black Golden Globe Award winners and nomineesAdams, Mary Agnes (1993). Whoopi Goldberg: From Street to Stardom. New York: Dillon Press. ISBN0-87518-562-2.Caper, William (1999). Whoopi Goldberg: Comedian and Movie Star. Springfield, NJ: Enslow Publishers. ISBN0-7660-1205-0.DeBoer, Judy (1999). Whoopi Goldberg. Mankato, MN: The Creative Company. ISBN0-88682-696-9.Gaines, Ann (1999). Whoopi Goldberg. Philadelphia: Chelsea House. ISBN0-7910-4938-8.Parish, James Robert (1997). Whoopi Goldberg: Her Journey from Poverty to Megastardom. Secaucus, NJ: Carol Publishing Group. ISBN1-55972-431-5.Whoopi Goldberg at the Internet Broadway DatabaseWhoopi Goldberg at the Internet Movie DatabaseWhoopi Goldberg at AllRoviWhoopi Goldberg at Memory Alpha (a Star Trek wiki)Interview with the Sunday Telegraph, May 2009Sister Act BookingWhoopi Goldberg at Emmys.com
Inside Man is a 2006 crime-drama film directed by Spike Lee. It stars Denzel Washington, Clive Owen, Willem Dafoe and Jodie Foster. The film's screenplay was written by Russell Gewirtz and produced by Brian Grazer. It was released in North America and several European markets on March 23 and 24, 2006.The film was shot on location in New York City and features an expansive and diverse ensemble cast. In addition to being a cerebral crime thriller, the film handles issues of good and evil in unexpected sources, corruption, prejudice, multiculturalism in the United States (and New York City in particular), and leaves several interpretations of right and wrong open to the audience.The film begins in medias res with Dalton Russell (Clive Owen) narrating his plight in the confines of an undisclosed cell, musing about the difference between a cell and a prison. Shortly afterwards, he begins in narration to describe the "perfect" plan for a bank robbery.[1]The robbery begins in flashback as robbers, dressed as painters and utilizing aliases under variants of the name "Steve," enter a bank, disable the security cameras, and seize control. All customers and bank employees are herded into the basement, where they are forced to surrender their keys and cell phones and change into painter uniforms and face masks identical to the robbers'. The hostages are locked into several rooms; periodically the robbers rotate them and sometimes place themselves in among the hostages at various points.Meanwhile, the police surround the bank. Detectives Keith Frazier (Denzel Washington) and Bill Mitchell (Chiwetel Ejiofor) introduce themselves to Captain Darius (Willem Dafoe) and briefly discuss the situation. Russell demands that the police provide food, and they provide pizzas with electronic bugs in the boxes. They overhear conversations in a foreign language and eventually identify it as Albanian. They discover, however, that the conversations are in fact propaganda recordings of deceased Albanian communist leader Enver Hoxha, implying that the robbers knew or guessed at the attempted surveillance.After being informed of the robbery in progress, Arthur Case (Christopher Plummer), chairman of the board of directors and founder of the bank, hires "fixer" Madeleine White (Jodie Foster) to try to arrange for the contents of his safe deposit box at the bank to remain secret. White meets with the mayor, then manipulates Frazier to let her talk with Russell. Mentioning the special interests she wants to protect, she persuades Russell to let her enter the bank to talk. When White requests access to the safe deposit box, Russell shows her a document bearing a swastika symbol, suggesting that Case received money, enough to fund his bank, from the Nazis during World War II for unspecified services that resulted in Jewish deaths. Russell reveals his motivation, saying, "Fact is, all lies, all evil deeds, they stink. You can cover them up for a while, but they don't go away." After assuring Russell that Case will make him a very wealthy man if he destroys or covers up this document, White leaves.Attempting a bluff, Frazier informs Russell that the plane he demanded is ready but he needs to confirm that all the hostages are safe before permitting them to leave. Russell allows him to enter the bank, and escorts Frazier around the building. As they check the hostages, they discuss the situation, and also Frazier's desire to propose to his girlfriend, something which Russell suggests he should do regardless of finances. Upon exiting the bank, Frazier attempts to overpower Russell, but another robber comes to Russell's aid. Russell lets Frazier leave unharmed with seemingly no repercussion for his attack. Frazier tells his colleagues that he intentionally tried to provoke Russell, but as Russell failed to harm him, he believes Russell is not a killer. Soon after, the robbers call and direct the police to point their cameras to a specific second-floor window where a hostage is executed. An enraged Frazier confronts Russell again, demanding to know the robbers' true intentions. Russell simply replies that Frazier is, "too damn smart to be a cop".The execution incident prompts the ESU team into action, and they plan to raid the building, using rubber bullets to knock everyone out. Frazier, however, discovers that the drawer Russell sent out that contained the robbers written demands also hid a radio transmitter. He tries to order Captain Darius to cancel the impending attack, but Darius ignores him.Inside the bank, Russell overheard the conversation between Darius and Frazier and is alarmed that the police plan to move in. The robbers detonate smoke bombs throughout the bank and release the hostages, resulting in a horde of identically dressed people exiting through the smoke in mass confusion. The police detain and interrogate everyone. However, the police are unable to distinguish the robbers from among the hostages. The police search fails to turn up Russell, but reveals the hostage execution was faked and the robbers' weapons turn out to be plastic toy replicas. As nothing appears to have been stolen, Frazier's superior orders him to bury the case, commenting "What do you expect me to say?".Frazier, however, searches the bank's records and finds that safe deposit box #392 has never appeared on any records since the bank's founding in 1948. He obtains a search warrant to open it. He is then confronted by White, who informs him of Case's Nazi dealings. She attempts to persuade Frazier to drop his investigation, reminding him that she has held up her end of their deal (guaranteeing his promotion and returning money he was implicated in stealing prior to the events of the movie). He refuses, pointing out that he never agreed to such a deal, and plays back their earlier conversation from a secret audio recording pen, ensuring he is protected.White confronts Case about his Nazi connections, and he confesses everything to her. She correctly surmises that the safe deposit box must have contained diamonds and that these were the robbers' true objective; Case then specifies a Cartier diamond ring, belonging to a Jewish friend whom he betrayed to the Nazis in exchange for money. Case is remorseful over his past, and had since engaged in international philanthropy to try to assuage his guilt.Russell's opening monologue is then repeated, but with the revelation that Russell is in fact hiding behind a fake wall erected inside the bank's supply room, thus revealing him as the titular "Inside Man", for he has been inside the bank all along. He emerges a week after the incident, with the contents of Case's safe deposit box (including the documents and numerous small bags containing diamonds) in his backpack. As he exits the bank, he deliberately bumps into Detective Frazier, who does not recognize him. Russell's associates meet him in an SUV outside the bank. Asked about the missing ring, Russell assures them he has left it "in good hands."Frazier opens the safe deposit box and finds Russell's gum wrapper, along with the Cartier ring and a scrawled message: "Follow the ring." Frazier confronts Case, informing him of his intention to investigate the ring. He confronts White and the Mayor, telling her that the ring was linked to Case's sordid past. He offers White the pen with the recording and gives her a card for the Office of War Crimes Issues at the U.S. State Department to request they investigate the situation.After his final encounter with White, Frazier goes home and finds a loose multi-carat diamond in his pocket, realizing it must have been slipped to him by the man he bumped into in the bank, and that man must have been Russell. As the movie ends, it is implied that Frazier will use the diamond to propose to his girlfriend.Originally Ron Howard was to direct the movie, but he backed out to do Cinderella Man. Spike Lee, a native New Yorker, was happy to direct a New York-based movie.[2]Much of the filming of Inside Man was done in Lower Manhattan at or near 20 Exchange Place, off William Street and Wall Street and just blocks from the New York Stock Exchange and South Street Seaport. Over three-quarters of the film's stage work was completed in New York City, making the production eligible for the city's "Made in New York" incentives program.[3]Along with being a heist film, Inside Man is notable for having a great deal of underlying racial tension and commentary on racial issues in modern American society, such as when the Sikh man, initially suspected to be an Arab, is immediately suspected by the police because of the turban he wears, and the tension between groups of different ethnic minorities.Inside Man is the film score to the 2006 movie of the same name. It was composed by American jazz musician and composer Terence Blanchard with additional orchestration by soundtrack composer Howard Drossin."Chaiyya Chaiyya Bollywood Joint", composed by A. R. Rahman, is featured in the opening and ending of the movie.Track listing[4][5][6]Inside Man earned acclaim from several well-known critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, it currently stands with an 86% rating, making it "Certified Fresh".It was named one of the 10 best films of 2006 by the American Film Institute.[citation needed]As of December 21, 2006, the film has grossed a total of US$88,513,495 in the United States box office and US$184,376,254 worldwide.[12] Inside Man was Spike Lee's most financially successful movie, and it led to many offers for the director to make more bank heist films.[13]Spike Lee and Brian Grazer were developing a sequel to Inside Man. Terry George, the screenwriter who wrote Hotel Rwanda, wrote the script.[14] However, in an ESPN chat on April 8, 2010, Lee said "We were going to do Inside Man 2 but it didn't work out."[15]1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Soundtrack5 Reception6 Abandoned sequel7 References8 External linksDenzel Washington as Detective Keith FrazierClive Owen as Dalton RussellWillem Dafoe as Captain John DariusChiwetel Ejiofor as Detective Bill MitchellJodie Foster as Madeleine WhiteChristopher Plummer as Arthur CaseCarlos Andrs Gmez as Kenneth DamerjianKim Director as Stevie, Valerie KeepsakeJames Ransone as Steve-OBernie Rachelle as ChaimPeter Gerety as Captain CoughlinVictor Colicchio as Sergeant CollinsWaris Ahluwalia as Vikram WaliaCassandra Freeman as Sylvia FrazierPeter Frechette as Peter HammondFlorina Petcu as Ilina MiritiaBlerim Destani as Albanian mobsterAllmovie [7]Empire [8]Premiere [9]Roger Ebert [10]Rolling Stone [11]Official websiteInside Man at the Internet Movie DatabaseInside Man at Box Office MojoInside Man at Rotten TomatoesInside Man at MetacriticInside Man soundtrackInside Man Script (January 17, 2005 revision)
Meet the Parents is a 2000 American comedy film written by Jim Herzfeld and John Hamburg and directed by Jay Roach. Starring Robert De Niro and Ben Stiller, the film chronicles a series of unfortunate events that befall a good-hearted but hapless male nurse while visiting his girlfriend's parents. Teri Polo, Blythe Danner, and Owen Wilson also star.Meet the Parents is a remake of a 1992 film of the same name directed by Greg Glienna and produced by Jim Vincent. Gliennawho also played the original film's main protagonistand Mary Ruth Clarke co-wrote the screenplay. Universal Studios purchased the rights to Glienna's film with the intent of creating a new version. Jim Herzfeld expanded the original script but development was halted for some time. Jay Roach read the expanded script and expressed his desire to direct the film but Universal declined him. At that time, Steven Spielberg was interested in directing the film while Jim Carrey was interested in playing the lead role. The studio only offered the film to Roach once Spielberg and Carrey left the project.Released in the United States and Canada on October 6, 2000 and distributed by Universal Studios, the film earned back its initial budget of $55 million in only eleven days. It went on to become one of the highest grossing films of 2000, earning over $160 million in North America and over $330 million worldwide. Meet the Parents was well received by film critics and viewers alike, winning several awards and earning additional nominations. Ben Stiller won two comedy awards for his performance and the film was chosen as the Favorite Comedy Motion Picture at the 2001 People's Choice Awards. The success of Meet the Parents inspired two film sequels, namely Meet the Fockers and Little Fockers released in 2004 and 2010 respectively. Meet the Parents also inspired a reality television show titled Meet My Folks and a situation comedy titled In-Laws, both of them debuting on NBC in 2002.Gaylord "Greg" Focker (Ben Stiller) is a nurse living in Chicago. He intends to propose to his girlfriend Pam Byrnes (Teri Polo), but his plan is disrupted when he learns that Pam's sister's fiance had asked Pam's father for permission before proposing. Greg and Pam travel to Pam's parents' house to attend Pam's sister's wedding. Greg hopes to propose to Pam in front of her family after receiving her father's permission. But this plan is put on hold when the airline loses his luggage, including the engagement ring.At the Byrnes' home, Greg meets Pam's father Jack (Robert De Niro), mother Dina (Blythe Danner) and their beloved cat Mr. Jinx. Jack takes an instant dislike to Greg and openly criticizes him for his choice of career as a male nurse and whatever else he sees as a difference between Greg and the Byrnes family. Greg tries to impress Jack, but his efforts fail. Greg becomes even more uncomfortable after he receives an impromptu lie detector test from Jack and later learns from Pam that her father is a retired CIA counterintelligence officer.Meeting the rest of Pam's family and friends, Greg still feels like an outsider. Despite efforts to impress the family, Greg's inadvertent actions make him an easy target for ridicule and anger: He accidentally gives Pam's sister a black eye during a volleyball mishap; uses a malfunctioning toilet that floods the Byrnes' back yard with sewage; sets the wedding altar on fire and inadvertently leads Jack to think he is a marijuana user. Later, Greg loses Jinx and replaces him with a stray whose tail he spray paints to make him look like Mr. Jinx.By now, the entire Byrnes family, including Pam, agrees that it is best for Greg to leave. Unwillingly, Greg goes to the airport where he is detained by airport security. Back at the Byrnes household, Jack tries to convince his wife and Pam that Greg would be an unsuitable husband. Upon receiving retribution from both his wife and Pam, Jack realizes that Pam truly loves Greg. Jack rushes to the airport, convinces airport security to release Greg and brings him back to the Byrnes household.Greg proposes to Pam. She accepts, and her parents agree that they should now meet Greg's parents. After Debbie's wedding, Jack views footage of Greg recorded by hidden cameras that he had placed strategically around their house."But I was trying to have in a kind of forties-farce way, the opportunity to create realistic characters, but heighten the comedic situations and predicaments a bit so that they're still very funny and there is still some very broad humor, but you would connect to the characters and completely identify with Ben Stiller's anxiety about not only meeting Robert De Niro's character and all, but the kind of characters from his past that come with him."The protagonist Greg Focker is a middle-class Jewish nurse whose social and cultural position is juxtaposed against the Byrnes family of upper-class White Anglo-Saxon Protestants (WASPs).[2][3] With respect to Greg as a Jew and a nurse when compared to the Byrnes and Banks families, a distinct cultural gap is created and subsequently widened. The cultural differences are often highlighted and Greg is repeatedly made aware of them. This serves to achieve comedic effect through character development and has also been commented upon as being indicative of thematic portrayal of Jewish characters' roles in modern film as well as being a prime example of how male nurses are portrayed in media.[4][5][6] Speaking about character development in Meet the Parents, director Jay Roach stated that he wanted an opportunity to "do character-driven comedy"[1] and "to create realistic characters, but heighten the comedic situations and predicaments."[1]Vincent Brook observes mainstream Hollywood cinema's tendency since the 1990s of incorporating Jewish liminality and "popularizing the Jew."[4] He explains the "manly Jewish triumph"[4] of characters like Jeff Goldblum's David Levinson in Independence Day and labels it as a "certain answer to America's yearnings for a new Jewish hero."[4] This stands in direct contrast to the schlemiel or "the Jewish fool"[4] which was seen to have been revitalized in the mid 1990s after faltering since the 1960s. The schlemiel, Brook explains, is an anti-hero in whose humiliation the audience finds supreme pleasure. Within that context, Brook describes Greg Focker's character as "the quintessential example of the postmodern schlemiel."[4] The repeated embarrassing encounters that Greg faces with his girlfriend's all-American family is compared to the example of Jason Biggs's character Jim Levenstein of the American Pie film series where Levenstein is often the comedic centerpiece due to his repeated sexual embarrassments.[7]Anne Bower writes about Jewish characters at mealtime as part of the broader movement she believes started in the 1960s where filmmakers started producing work that explored the "Jewish self-definition."[3] She postulates that the dinner table becomes an arena where Jewish characters are often and most pointedly put into "conflicts with their ethnic and sexual selves."[3] She describes the example of Greg sitting down for dinner with the Byrnes family and being asked to bless the food. In this scene, Greg attempts to recite a prayer by improvising and, in doing so, launches into a recital of the song "Day by Day" from Act I of Godspell. Bower notes this scene as "particularly important for establishing the cultural distance"[3] between the Jewish Greg and the Christian Byrnes. She also noted that the social gap is further widened next morning at breakfast when Greg is the last person to arrive at the breakfast table; he shows up to breakfast wearing pajamas while everyone else is fully clothed. Here Greg is shown as the only person eating a bagel, which Bower argues as being a clear signifier of Jewishness.[3]Based on common misconceptions and stereotypes about men in nursing, Greg's profession is repeatedly brought up by Jack Byrnes in a negative context and the character of Greg Focker has come to be one of the best known film portrayals of a male nurse.[6] Even though men dominated the profession in earlier times,[8] there has been a feminization of the nursing profession over the course of the last century which has caused men in nursing to often be portrayed as misfits by the media.[9] A common stereotype is that of a man who accepts a career in nursing as an unfortunate secondary career choice, either failing to become a physician or still trying to become one. Such stereotyping is due to a presumption that a man would prefer to be a physician but is unable to become one due to lack of intelligence or non-masculine attributes. Jack Byrnes is often seen openly criticizing Greg's career choice per his perception of nursing being an effeminate profession. In their book Men in Nursing: History, Challenges, and Opportunities authors Chad O'Lynn and Russell Tranbarger present this as an example of a negative portrayal.[10] Commenting on the same issue but disagreeing, Barbara Cherry in her book Contemporary Nursing: Issues, Trends, & Management called the portrayal of Greg as a nurse "one of the most positive film portrayals of men who are nurses"[11] and commented that Greg "humorously addresses and rises above the worst of all stereotypes that are endured by men in this profession."[11] Sandy and Harry Summers in the book Saving Lives: Why the Media's Portrayal of Nurses Puts Us All at Risk postulate that Greg's character, although intelligent and firm in his defense of his profession, "might have done more to rebut the stereotypes"[6] while also reporting that "some men in nursing"[6] expressed their opinions that it would have been better to not present the stereotypes at all.[6]Meet the Parents is a remake of a 1992 independent film of the same name.[12][13][14][15] Greg Glienna and Mary Ruth Clarke wrote the original story and screenplay. Glienna also directed and starred in the 76 minute film which was filmed on 16 mm film in 1991 and released the following year.[16][17][18][19] The 1992 film also marked one of only several film roles played by comedian Emo Philips which he also helped produce.[13][14][18][20] Film producer Elliot Grove, founder of Raindance Film Festival and the British Independent Film Awards, listed the original Meet the Parents on his personal Top Ten list of favorite films where he called it "much funnier and tighter than the Hollywood version".[21] The 1992 film was a featured entry in the 1995 Raindance Film Festival.Producer Nancy Tenenbaum acquired the rights to the short film.[22] After she sent a copy of the original film to several people of interest, filmmaker Steven Soderbergh replied that he was interested and that he wanted to direct a remake. He brought it to the attention of Universal Studios who initially declined but subsequently optioned the rights to the film in 1995.[12][15] Soderbergh took on the project but then dropped it when he got involved with Out of Sight.[12][23]"...I think the film is fantastic, and I can't imagine a screenwriter being any happier with a film unless he directs it himself. Which, in this case, would've been a disaster since Jay is a brilliant director..."Universal approached screenwriter Jim Herzfeld to expand the screenplay.[22][25] Herzfeld expanded the modest script, completing the first draft as early as 1996. He initially presented it to Roach who had, up to that point, directed the first two Austin Powers films. Roach admits to have liked the script from the beginning[26] and was very much willing to make the film even though he thought "it needed more work."[24] Universal initially declined to have relatively inexperienced Roach take on the project. The studio was skeptical of Roach's ability to direct a "less-cartoony, character-driven script" compared to a comedy like Austin Powers.[24] Universal's reluctance to give the project to Roach was also due to new interest from Steven Spielberg who wanted to direct and produce the film with Jim Carrey playing the role of Greg Focker.[24][25][26][27][28] However, Spielberg and Carrey never took the project past the planning stages.[24] The script was then returned to Roach who had by now taken on his next project of Mystery, Alaska but was still interested in making Meet the Parents.The drafts of the script were written by Herzfeld and, once De Niro and Stiller were confirmed as stars, John Hamburg was brought on board "to help fit the script to their verbal styles."[22] Due to changes in directorial and acting line-ups after the early drafts of the script were written, Hamburg kept adjusting and re-writing the script well after production had already begun.[26][27]Upon the suggestion of Universal Studios, Roach cast De Niro in the role of Jack Byrnes due to critical acclaim of De Niro's recent comedy work in films such as Analyze This and in the live-action/animated film The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle.[24] De Niro's character Jack Byrnes is Pam's father and a retired CIA operative who is overly protective of his family and has a hard time warming up to his daughters' love interests. The script was not written with De Niro in mind as Jack Byrnes; the first draft of the script was completed in 1996, well before De Niro had done any comedy work.[25] However, shortly after De Niro finished filming The Adventures of Rocky and Bullwinkle, Universal suggested to Roach that he should cast De Niro for the role to which Roach agrees that he had "no reservations whatsoever."[24] In an interview with Entertainment Weekly, De Niro stated that he was in active pursuit of comedic roles since Analyze This.[27] Admitting that he had initial reservations about starring in Meet the Parents, De Niro said that he felt "pushed into it" due to insistence by Jane RosenthalDe Niro's partner in TriBeCa Productions who also acted as one of the producers of Meet the Parents.[27] Screenwriter Jim Herzfeld and director Jay Roach both confirmed that, after committing to the project and reviewing the script, Robert De Niro was actually the person who came up with the idea for the famous polygraph test scene.[25][27] Asked about working with De Niro given the serious nature of his previous roles, Ben Stiller said that "it was a little bit intimidating working with De Niro" but that he "has a great sense of humor and I think that's the biggest surprise about him."[29]Explaining how Ben Stiller came to be cast in the role of Greg, Roach states: "I saw Meet the Parents as an anxiety dream, and in my view nobody plays that kind of material better than Ben."[24] Additionally, Roach was impressed with Stiller's creative and ad lib abilities stating that "he has lots of great ideas and he's very skilled at loose improvisation."[24] Stiller's character Gaylord "Greg" Focker is a nurse who loves his girlfriend and tries desperately to impress her parents by any means which includes telling harmless little lies which are then covered up with bigger lies and elaborate cover-up schemes. The film's script was initially written with Jim Carrey in the role of Greg and contained much more physical comedy, something that Stiller did not think would be successful with himself playing the role.[26][27] This resulted in deletion of some scenes but also in introduction of at least one unscripted scene that was completely improvised by Stiller.[24][26] Roach cast Stiller only after it became clear that Carrey would not be taking on the role.[24]The consideration to play the character of Pam ByrnesGreg's girlfriend who acts as a mediator between Greg and the Byrnes family, especially her father Jackwas initially given to Australian actress Naomi Watts. She ultimately lost the role to Teri Polo because the filmmakers "didn't think [Watts] was sexy enough".[30][31]Other characters in the film were played by Blythe Danner (as Dina Byrnes, Jack's wife and Pam's mother), Owen Wilson (as Kevin Rawley, Pam's ex-fiancee), Nicole DeHuff (as Debbie Byrnes, Pam's sister), Jon Abrahams (as Denny Byrnes, the youngest child of the Jack and Dina Byrnes), Thomas McCarthy (as Bob Banks, Debbie's fianc), and James Rebhorn as (Larry Banks, Bob Banks' father and a close friend of Jack's).[32] Phyllis George, who is a former Miss Texas and Miss America pageant winner and has appeared on numerous television programs as a guest and a host, made her acting debut as Linda Banks, Larry's wife and Bob's mother.[33]The role of Mr. Jinx the cat was played by two five year-old Himalayan cats named Bailey and Misha (sometimes written as Meesha[34]). The American Humane Association oversaw the filming of all scenes where the cats were used and ensured the animals' obedience and well-being by keeping two trainers and a veterinarian on set at all times.[35]Greg Glienna did not come up with the surname Focker; Greg's character in the original film did not have a last name. The name was written into the script after Jim Carrey came up with the idea for the Focker surname during a creative session held before he abandoned the project.[12][17][28] Once Meet the Parents was submitted for rating evaluation, the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) questioned the surname Focker as possibly an expletive and, due to the repetitiveness of the surname throughout the film, the film was in danger of being rated R according to the Motion Picture Association of America film rating system. The filmmakers were asked if they had made up the name or if they can prove that such a name exists. The studio submitted to the MPAA a list of real people with the surname Focker which ensured that the film retained a PG-13 rating.[36]Meet the Parents had its theatrical release in United States and Canada on October 6, 2000. Distributed domestically by Universal Studios, the film had an advertising budget of $33.9 million.[37] It quickly proved to be a financial success taking in $28.6 million during its opening weekend and averaging $10,950 per theater in a total of 2,614 theaters.[38] It finished as the top earning film for the weekend of October 6 to October 8 beating the second place Remember the Titans by a margin of over $9 million and bringing in more than four times the earnings of Get Carter, the next highest earning film released that same weekend.[39] The film's opening weekend earnings were the highest ever for any film released in the month of October as well as the marking the highest opening weekend earnings for a film starring Robert De Niro.[40] The film's earnings for the second week of release dropped by 26% down to $21.1 million, which still kept the film in the number one position at the box office beating the second place Remember the Titans by a margin of over $8 million.[41] By the end of the second week of release, the film had already grossed over $58 million, surpassing its production budget of $55 million.[41] It spent its first four weeks of theatrical release as the highest grossing film at the U.S. box office.[38][42] Meet the Parents was displaced from its number one spot during the weekend of November 3 to November 5 by the newly released Charlie's Angels while still managing to stay ahead of The Legend of Bagger Vance, another new release that debuted in the number three spot.[43] It remained in the top ten grossing films until its eleventh week of release.[38] In the United Kingdom the film had its theatrical premiere on December 15, 2000 and was distributed by United International Pictures (UIP).[44][45] There, it managed to earn over $21 million during its run.[46] In Australia, also being distributed by UIP, it was released on December 26, 2000[47] where it earned over $11 million during the theatrical run.[46]At the end of its theatrical run on March 29, 2001  25 weeks after its opening day in North Americathe film had grossed $166.2 million in the United States and a total of $330.4 million worldwide,[48] making it the seventh highest grossing film of the year both domestically[49] and worldwide.[50]Meet the Parents was released on VHS & DVD on March 6, 2001.[51] The DVD sales for the film were successful, taking in over $200 million for 2001.[52] Billboard magazine listed the film as having the highest video sales for all weeks from March 31 up to and including April 21,[53][54][55][56] being the top selling DVD for the weeks of March 24 and March 31,[53][57] and being the top rented video for the weeks of April 7 and April 14.[54][55]The DVD release provides only the letterbox format of the film and is also 108 minutes in length. The aspect ratio is 1:85 with an accommodation for an enhanced 16:9 playback. English language audio tracks available with the film are a 5.1 Dolby Digital and DTS with the main noticeable difference being only a slightly louder bass on one of the tracks.[58] A French language audio track is also available only in 5.1 Dolby Digital Format. Additionally, English language subtitles are provided as well.[58]The single disc "Collector's Edition" edition contains two audio commentaries, one a light-hearted and humorous discussion between Roach, Stiller, De Niro and producer Jane Rosenthal and the other a more formal technical commentary on the film-making aspects by the director and editor Jon Poll. The director discusses issues that include working with the cast, utilizing the best camera angles for comedic effect, discussing scenes that were improvised and scenes that were scripted, and commenting on issues surrounding shooting on location. The editor speaks about putting together the best functioning comedy from material that was filmed and discusses some deleted scenes that were excluded from the DVD release. In addition, the DVD features a twelve minute outtake section, three minutes of deleted scenes, and Universal's Spotlight on Location featurette. Spotlight on Location is a standard 24-minute long featurette about the making of the film which includes interviews with the cast members and contains behind-the-scenes footage.[58] It also contains two games called Take The Lie Detector Test and The Forecaster Game as well as PC material such as wallpapers and screensavers.[58][59] The region 2 edition of the DVD was released on October 22, 2001. A region 1 "Bonus Edition" was released on December 14, 2004 and contains three additional featurettes: Silly Cat Tricks, The Truth About Lying and a 12-minute long Jay Roach: A Director's Profile.[13]The original motion picture soundtrack for Meet the Parents was released on September 26, 2000 on the DreamWorks Records record label.[60] The soundtrack features 14 original compositions by Randy Newman as well as additional tracks by Bobby Womack, Lee Dorsey, and Dr. John and a hidden bonus track. Newman's original song "A Fool in Love" was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original SongNewman's 14th Oscar nomination[61]at the 73rd Academy Awards but it ultimately lost to Bob Dylan's "Things Have Changed" for Wonder Boys.[62] For the same song, Newman also won the 16th Annual ASCAP Film & Television Music Award in the Top Box Office Films category[63] and was nominated at the 5th Golden Satellite Awards in the Original Song category.[64] Dan Goldwasser, in his review of the soundtrack for SoundtrackNet, gave credit to Newman and the soundtrack for doing "an excellent job keeping the humor level high."[60]"Making a funny but not mean, smart but not smug, broad but not lazy ensemble comedy about contemporary people in a realistic setting is hard. For which Meet the Parents is to be commended  it's a bouncy, loose-limbed, families-do-the-darnedest-things sitcom that elicits ungrudging laughs without invoking water boys, pet detectives, or Klumps."The film received a generally positive response from film critics, being commended on the subtlety of its humor[65][66][67][68][69] as well as being named as "the funniest"[22][70] or "one of the funniest"[71][72][73][74] films of the year by several critics. As of December 24, 2011, the aggregate review website Rotten Tomatoes registered an 84% positive response based on reviews from 142 critics and certified the film "Fresh" with an average rating of 6.9/10.[75] As of the same date, Metacritic, another aggregate review website, registered a rating of 73 out of 100, based on 33 reviews,[76] which is classified as "Generally favorable reviews" by the website's rating system.[77] Kenneth Turan, film critic for Los Angeles Times, called it "the funniest film of the year so far, possibly the most amusing mainstream live-action comedy since There's Something About Mary."[22] Critic Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal stated that the film "does almost everything right with a story about everything going wrong"[70] and that it "works up a major comic delirium on the theme of Murphy's Law",[70] concluding that "Meet the Parents is the funniest movie of the year."[70] CNN's Paul Clinton proclaimed "Meet the Parents is one of the best comedies of this - or any other - year",[72] calling it "wonderfully funny"[72] and expressing his hope that "the Academy will also recognize this wonderful movie, something it rarely does when it comes to comedies"[72] Time magazine's film critic Richard Schickel stated that the film was "divinely invented and perfectly orchestrated".[78] He complimented the screenplay by calling the screenwriters Jim Herzfeld and John Hamburg "a couple of skilled tool-and-die makers"[78] as well as the acting cast because he believed that they "understand that palpable reality will always trump frenzied fantasy when it comes to getting laughs."[78] Schickel concluded his review by proclaiming Meet the Parents a "superbly antic movie".[78] Todd McCarthy of Variety magazine called the film "flat-out hilarious"[79] and Neil Smith of BBC proclaimed that "there's not a weak scene in this super-funny picture"[80] while awarding it a rating of five stars out of five.[80] Film critic Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three stars out of four comparing the film to Roach's previous work on the Austin Powers film series and offering his opinion that "[Meet the Parents] is funnier because it never tries too hard."[66] Critic Christopher Null of AMC's Filmcritic.com claimed that "Meet the Parents is one of the funniest comedies I've seen since Annie Hall".[73] Lisa Schwarzbaum from Entertainment Weekly called the script "unforced"[65] and concluded that the film "goes down like a flute of Champagne, leaving an aftertaste of giggles."[65]However, Internet film critic James Berardinelli, in spite of awarding it two and a half stars out of four, gave the film a somewhat scathing review. On his website, Berardinelli wrote that "Meet the Parents is put together like a TV sit-com,"[81] that Roach "strings together a series of hit-and-miss lowbrow gags with little care for whether any of the connecting material is coherent, interesting, or enjoyable (in most cases, it's none of those three)"[81] and concluding that "even with Stiller and De Niro, Meet the Parents is an encounter that can be postponed until it's available on video."[81] Jeff Vice of the Deseret News, another detractor of the film, proclaimed Meet the Parents "only erratically funny"[82] and accused Roach of taking "the cheap way out with a series of unfunny jokes."[82] Critic Peter Bradshaw's review of the film in The Guardian concludes that Meet the Parents "is somehow less than the sum of its parts. It strains to come to life, but never quite makes it."[83] After the film was released on home media, DVD reviewer and Rolling Stone magazine contributor Douglas Pratt in his book Doug Pratt's DVD: Movies, Television, Music, Art, Adult, and More! stated that "perhaps in the crowded theater the film is hysterical, but in the quieter venue of home video, it just seems sadistic, and as the humor evaporates, the holes in the plot become clearer."[58]The success of Meet the Parents was initially responsible for a 2002 NBC reality television show entitled Meet My Folks in which a young woman's love interest, vying for her family's approval, is interrogated by the woman's overprotective father with the help of a lie detector machine.[89][90] In September 2002, NBC also aired a situation comedy entitled In-Laws. During the development of the sitcom, NBC called it "a Meet the Parents project" which prompted an investigation by Universal into whether NBC was infringing on Universal's copyright.[91] Universal did not pursue any action against NBC but neither show lasted more than one season.In 2004, Meet the Fockers was released as a sequel to Meet the Parents.[92][93] Directed again by Jay Roach with a screenplay by Jim Herzfeld and John Hamburg, the sequel chronicles the events that take place when the Byrnes family meets Bernie and Roz Focker, Greg's parents, played by Dustin Hoffman and Barbra Streisand. The producers intended for Greg's parents to be the opposite of the Byrnes' conservative, upper class, WASPy demeanor; to that effect, producer Jane Rosenthal explains that "Dustin Hoffman and Barbra Streisand were our dream team."[94] Meet the Fockers proved to be another financial success grossing $280 million domestically and $516 million worldwide,[95] outperforming Meet the Parents by a large margin and finishing as the fourth highest grossing film of 2004.[96]In February 2007, Universal Studios announced that they would be making a second sequel in the franchise, titled Little Fockers.[97][98][99] The film was to be directed by Roach with the screenplay written by Larry Stuckey, Roach's former assistant.[97][99] The sequel brings back De Niro, Stiller, Polo, Danner as well as Hoffman and Streisand.[97][99]On July 18, 2005, a regularly scheduled American Airlines flight from Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport to San Juan, Puerto Rico had to be diverted back to Fort Lauderdale shortly after take-off due to a bomb threat. The pilot turned the airplane around approximately 40 minutes into the flight after a flight attendant found a crumpled napkin that read "Bomb, bomb, bomb ... meet the parents," a clear reference to the scene in which Ben Stiller's character repeatedly shouts the word "bomb" while being detained by airport security.[100][101] The airplane was met by a bomb squad of the local sheriff's office as well as the FBI whose agents questioned the plane's 176 passengers about the note.October 6, 2000(2000-10-06)1 Plot2 Themes3 Production

3.1 Background
3.2 Writing
3.3 Casting

3.1 Background3.2 Writing3.3 Casting4 Rating5 Release

5.1 Theatrical run
5.2 Home media

5.1 Theatrical run5.2 Home media6 Soundtrack7 Reception

7.1 Critical reception
7.2 Awards

7.1 Critical reception7.2 Awards8 Legacy9 See also10 Notes11 References12 External links3.1 Background3.2 Writing3.3 Casting5.1 Theatrical run5.2 Home media7.1 Critical reception7.2 AwardsPeople's Choice Awards (2001)[84]

Favorite Comedy Motion Picture

Favorite Comedy Motion Picture2001 MTV Movie Awards[85]

Best Comedic Performance - Ben Stiller

Best Comedic Performance - Ben Stiller2001 MTV Movie Awards[85]

Best Line - "Are you a pothead, Focker?" - Robert De Niro

Best Line - "Are you a pothead, Focker?" - Robert De NiroAmerican Comedy Awards (2001)[86]

Funniest Actor in a Motion Picture - Ben Stiller

Funniest Actor in a Motion Picture - Ben Stiller16th Annual ASCAP Film & Television Music Awards[63]

Top Box Office Films - Randy Newman

Top Box Office Films - Randy NewmanFavorite Comedy Motion PictureBest Comedic Performance - Ben StillerBest Line - "Are you a pothead, Focker?" - Robert De NiroFunniest Actor in a Motion Picture - Ben StillerTop Box Office Films - Randy Newman58th Golden Globe Awards[87]

Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy - Robert De Niro (Lost to George Clooney for O Brother, Where Art Thou?)

Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy - Robert De Niro (Lost to George Clooney for O Brother, Where Art Thou?)73rd Academy Awards[62]

Best Original Song - Randy Newman for "A Fool in Love" (Lost to Bob Dylan's "Things Have Changed" for Wonder Boys)

Best Original Song - Randy Newman for "A Fool in Love" (Lost to Bob Dylan's "Things Have Changed" for Wonder Boys)American Comedy Awards (2001)[88]

Funniest Motion Picture (Lost to Best in Show)

Funniest Motion Picture (Lost to Best in Show)5th Golden Satellite Awards[64]

Original Song - Randy Newman for "A Fool in Love" (Lost to Bjrk's "I've Seen It All" for Dancer in the Dark)

Original Song - Randy Newman for "A Fool in Love" (Lost to Bjrk's "I've Seen It All" for Dancer in the Dark)Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy - Robert De Niro (Lost to George Clooney for O Brother, Where Art Thou?)Best Original Song - Randy Newman for "A Fool in Love" (Lost to Bob Dylan's "Things Have Changed" for Wonder Boys)Funniest Motion Picture (Lost to Best in Show)Original Song - Randy Newman for "A Fool in Love" (Lost to Bjrk's "I've Seen It All" for Dancer in the Dark)2000 in filmCinema of the United StatesList of American films of 2000Pratt, Douglas (June 2004). "Meet the Parents (DreamWorks, 21133)". Doug Pratt's DVD: Movies, Television, Music, Art, Adult, and More!. Harbor Electronic Publishing. pp.783. ISBN1-932916-00-8.Press, Skip (2004). "The Chill of Reality". The Ultimate Writer's Guide to Hollywood. Barns & Noble Books. pp.170. ISBN0-7607-6110-8.Laufenberg, Norbert (2005). "Chapter Seven G". Entertainment Celebrities. Trafford Publishing. pp.253. ISBN1-4120-5335-8.Sandler, Corey (2007). "Animal Planet Live!". Econoguide Walt Disney World Resort Universal Orlando, 5th Edition. Globe Pequot. pp.307. ISBN978-0-7627-4169-4.Kaufman, Anthony (2002). "Patricia Thomson/1996". Steven Soderbergh: Interviews. University Press of Mississippi. pp.92. ISBN1-57806-428-7.Billboard (March 2001a). "Top Videos". Billboard 113 (12): pp. 60.Billboard (March 2001b). "Top Videos". Billboard 113 (13): pp. 73.Billboard (April 2001c). "Top Videos". Billboard 113 (14): pp. 95.Billboard (April 2001d). "Top Videos". Billboard 113 (15): pp. 64.Billboard (April 2001e). "Top Videos". Billboard 113 (16): pp. 72.Brook, Vincent (2006). "Jews on the Edge". You Should See Yourself: Jewish Identity in Postmodern American Culture. Rutgers University Press. pp.240241. ISBN978-0-8135-3844-0.Bower, Anne (2004). "The Dinner Table". Reel Food: Essays on Food and Film. Routledge. pp.9799. ISBN0-415-97110-1.O'Lynn, Chad; Tranbarger, Russell (2007). Men in Nursing: History, Challenges, and Opportunities. Springer Publishing. pp.6257. ISBN0-8261-0221-2.Cherry, Barbara (2005). "The Contemporary Image of Professional Nursing". Contemporary Nursing: Issues, Trends, & Management. Elsevier. pp.34. ISBN0-323-02968-X.Wasko, Janet (2003). "Advertising". How Hollywood Works. SAGE. pp.196. ISBN0-7619-6813-X.Summers, Sandy; Summers, Harry (2009). "Who Wants Yesterday's Girl?". Saving Lives: Why the Media's Portrayal of Nurses Puts Us All at Risk. Kaplan. pp.172173. ISBN978-1-4277-9845-9.Official websiteMeet the Parents at the Internet Movie DatabaseMeet the Parents at the TCM Movie DatabaseMeet the Parents at AllRoviMeet the Parents at Rotten TomatoesMeet the Parents at MetacriticMeet the Parents at Box Office Mojo
Christopher Jonathan James Nolan (/noln/; born 30 July 1970) is a British-American film director, screenwriter, and producer.[4][5]Known for his unconventional and often highly conceptual narratives, Nolan received serious notice with his art-house crossover Memento (2000), which garnered significant critical praise and numerous awards, including a nomination for Best Original Screenplay at the 74th Academy Awards.His works include acclaimed commercial films like The Dark Knight trilogy (20052012), and Inception (2010), as well as smaller films, such as Following (1998), Insomnia (2002), and The Prestige (2006).Nolan co-founded Syncopy Films with his wife, Emma Thomas, and they have produced all his films since The Prestige (2006). He has collaborated with a variety of talents including cinematographer and director Wally Pfister, screenwriters David S. Goyer and Jonathan Nolan, film editor Lee Smith, composers David Julyan and Hans Zimmer, special effects coordinator Chris Corbould, and actors Christian Bale, Cillian Murphy, Tom Hardy, Ken Watanabe, Marion Cotillard, Leonardo DiCaprio, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Gary Oldman, Michael Caine, and Morgan Freeman.In total, his directorial efforts have grossed US$3.5 billion worldwide,[6] and been nominated for 21 Academy Awards. In July 2012, Christopher Nolan was honored with a hand and footprint ceremony at Graumans Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles.[7]Nolan was born in London, to a British father, who worked as an advertising copywriter, and an American mother, a flight attendant.[8][9] As a dual citizen of the United Kingdom and the United States,[10] he spent his childhood in both London and Chicago.[11] He began making films at the age of seven using his father's Super 8 camera and his toy action figures.[12] While living in Chicago, he made short films with film director Roko Belic. They collaborated on a surreal 8mm short, Tarantella (1989), which was shown on Image Union, an independent film and video showcase on the Public Broadcasting Service.[13][14] He was also briefly affiliated with Dan Eldon's African charity projects in the early 1990s.[15]Nolan was educated at Haileybury and Imperial Service College, an independent school on Hertford Heath in Hertfordshire, and later read English literature at University College London (UCL). He chose the university specifically for its filmmaking facilities, which consisted of a Steenbeck editing suite and 16mm film cameras.[16] Nolan was president of the college film society from 1992 to 1994; a contemporary described him as talented and focused on learning as much as possible about the mechanics and technology of filmmaking.[16] Nolan graduated in 1993, but continued to associate with the film society. Meanwhile he earned a living by producing corporate training videos, before moving to Los Angeles and getting a freelance job reading scripts.[16] In 1997, Nolan married Emma Thomas, his girlfriend at UCL and long-time film producer. They have four children.[17]Nolan began his professional filmmaking career with a series of short films. Larceny (1996), a short he made in black-and-white with a restricted cast, crew and equipment in the space of a weekend, contained many traits later to be seen in his first feature.[18] Larceny was funded by Nolan himself, but shot using the society's equipment. It played at the Cambridge Film Festival in 1996, and is considered to be one of the best shorts produced by UCLU in recent generations.[19] Doodlebug (1997) is a kafkaesque short about a man chasing an insect with a shoe around a flat, only to discover on killing it that it is a miniature of himself. The short was later released on home video by Cinema16.[20]Nolan directed his first feature film, Following, in 1998. The film depicts an unemployed young writer who trails strangers through London, hoping that they will provide inspiration for his first novel. Nolan made the film on a budget of only 3,000.[21] He shot it on weekends, over the course of a year, working with friends he had met at UCLU.[22] To conserve expensive film stock, every scene in the film was rehearsed extensively to ensure that the first or second take could be used in the final edit. Nolan directed the film from his own script, and also photographed and edited it himself.[22] It began to receive notice after a screening at the 1998 San Francisco International Film Festival,[23] and was eventually distributed on a limited basis by Zeitgeist Films in 1999.[24] On December 11, 2012, the film will be released on DVD and Blu-ray as part of The Criterion Collection.[25]As a result of the film's success, Newmarket Films optioned the script for Nolan's next film, Memento. The movie is based on the short story Memento Mori, written by Christopher's brother, Jonathan Nolan. It follows Leonard Shelby (played by Guy Pearce), who suffers from anterograde amnesia, and uses notes and tattoos to hunt for the man he thinks killed his wife.[26] Memento premiered on September 5, 2000, at the Venice International Film Festival, where it received a standing ovation.[27] The film was successful at the box office and received numerous accolades, including Academy Award nominations for Original Screenplay and Film Editing.[28] Memento was subsequently mentioned by many critics as one of the best films of the decade (20002009).[29]Nolan followed Memento with the psychological thriller Insomnia, starring Academy Award winners Al Pacino, Robin Williams and Hilary Swank. Shot in the frozen badlands of British Columbia, Insomnia is about two Los Angeles detectives sent to a northern town in Alaska to investigate the methodical murder of a local teenager. The film is a remake of the 1997 Norwegian film of the same name, albeit with major changes in both the plot and the nature of the main character. Steven Soderbergh, who had recommended Nolan as a potential director to Warner Bros., served as an executive producer with George Clooney, through the now defunct Section Eight Productions.[30] About taking on the project, Nolan said:In 2005, Nolan co-wrote and directed Batman Begins. After Warner Bros. put its Batman film franchise on an indefinite hiatus when the fourth installment was released to negative reviews and disappointing box office returns, Nolan, together with David S. Goyer, convinced Warner Bros. to entrust the series to a relatively unknown director.[32][33] Batman Begins was released on 15 June 2005 to acclaim and commercial success. The film revived the franchise, and heralded a trend of darker genre films, that either retold back-stories or rebooted them altogether. Batman Begins ranked as the eighth highest grossing film of 2005 in the United States and the ninth highest grossing worldwide.[34] The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Cinematography and for three BAFTA awards.[35][36] In November 2008, Empire ranked Batman Begins 81 in its 500 Greatest Movies of All Time list.[37] In a retrospective interview with The Museum of Modern Art, Nolan talked about how he had envisioned the project;Before returning to the Batman franchise, Nolan directed, co-wrote and produced The Prestige (2006). The Prestige is an adaptation of the Christopher Priest novel about two rival magicians in the 19th century. The film revolves around the intense professional rivalry between two stage illusionists, their desire to develop better tricks than the other draws them into a battle of skill and technology, dominated by obsession, secrecy and duality.[39] Like the novel before it, the film has aspects of metafiction and makes use of flashback to tell parts of the story. Its title refers to the final part of a stage performance, where the performer attempts to return a vanished object before the eyes of the audience. This usage of "prestige" is an archaic meaning that was revived by Priest for use in the book.[40] The film received a mostly positive response from critics and made over $109million worldwide.[41] The Prestige obtained Oscar nominations for Best Cinematography and Best Art Direction.[42]In late July 2006, the sequel to Batman Begins was officially confirmed as The Dark Knight (2008).[43] Considered one of the best films of the 2000s and one of the best superhero films ever made,[44][45][46] the film received highly positive reviews and set numerous records during its theatrical run.[47] The film earned $534,858,444 in North America and $469,700,000 in other territories for a worldwide total of $1,004,558,444.[48] The Dark Knight is also notable for being the first feature film partially shot on the 15/70mm IMAX format.[49] At the 81st Academy Awards, it was nominated for a total of eight Oscars, and won two, the Academy Award for Best Sound Editing, and a posthumous Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for Heath Ledger.[50] The film was noticeably absent from the Best Picture list and many speculated that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences later changed their number of nominees to ten, instead of the traditional five, because of the omission. In a question-and-answer session that followed the announcement, the Academys president Sidney Ganis said; I would not be telling you the truth if I said the words Dark Knight did not come up. [51]After the success of The Dark Knight, Warner Bros. contracted Nolan to a seven-figure deal to direct Inception (2010). Nolan directed, wrote and co-produced the film which was described as "a contemporary sci-fi actioner set within the architecture of the mind".[52] The film was released on 16 July 2010 to largely positive reviews and grossed over $800 million worldwide.[53] Writing in Senses of Cinema, Ian Allen Paul placed Inception within a trend in modern American film which treats themes of simulation and "meta-reality".[54] Exploration of the subjectivity of experience, and questioning the reality of the material world had been explored in the preceding decade in films such as The Matrix (1999), eXistenZ (1999), Paprika (2006), Synecdoche, New York (2008), and have existed long before in Western philosophy and post-modernism. Nolan's framework in Inception is slightly different to other films: characters sedate themselves, connect to a machine and can inhabit a shared dream space built by one of them, "the architect". The world is constantly evolving as each character's movements affects the shared environment.[54] Inception was nominated for eight Oscars, and won four awards; Best Cinematography, Best Sound Mixing, Best Sound Editing and Best Visual Effects.[55]During post-production on Inception, Nolan gave an interview for These Amazing Shadows (2011), a documentary spotlighting film appreciation and preservation by the National Film Registry. He agreed to do the interview after speaking with Doug Blush, the producer, at a piano recital featuring his son and Blush's daughter.[56] Nolan also appeared in Side by Side (2012), a documentary about the history, process and workflow of both digital and photochemical film creation.[57]In 2012, Nolan directed his third and final Batman film The Dark Knight Rises. Nolan was initially hesitant about returning to the series, but agreed to come back after developing a story with his brother and Goyer that he felt would conclude the series on a satisfactory note.[58][59] The film was released 20 July 2012 to critical acclaim, and like its predecessor, it performed extremely well at the box-office.[60] The Dark Knight Rises became the thirteenth film to cross the $1 billion mark, and Nolan the second film director to have two separate films doing so (the first being James Cameron with Titanic and Avatar).[61]Nolan is currently co-producing a reinvention of Superman, called Man of Steel.[62] Although Zack Snyder is directing,[62] Nolan will have significant creative input in the process.[58]On 13 June 2012, Nolan confirmed that he and Emma Thomas would executive produce Wally Pfister's directorial debut, Transcendence.[63] Jack Paglen wrote the screenplay, which has been described as a present-day science fiction film, with a fairly big concept.[64]Nolan spoke about his directing style in a 2012 interview for DGA Quarterly.He also spoke about his approach to working with actors.Nolan prefers shooting on film, as opposed to digital video.Nolan chooses to minimise the amount of Computer Generated Imagery for special effects in his films, preferring to use practical effects whenever possible. For instance, his films Batman Begins and Inception had 620 and 500 visual effects shots respectively, which is considered minor in comparison to contemporary visual effects epics that can have around 1,500 or 2,000 VFX shots.[66]Nolan's films share several common characteristics. In addition to actors who appear in multiple films, Nolan's visual style emphasizes urban settings, men in suits, and generally muted colors, bordering on a monochromatic palette. In terms of plot, there is usually an instance of a main character's wife, girlfriend, or partner being killed in a violent manner, resulting in the main character's mental instability. In terms of themes, Nolan seems to be interested in "theatricality" and "deception", which would explain his use of complex narrative structures. Theatricality and deception are embedded as internal themes and also function as Nolan's commentary on the artifice of filmmaking itself.Nolan's films always end with the title of the movie popping up before the credits roll. The credits then end with the title of the movie and fades as the song stops.Nolan has cast a number of different actors and actresses in his films multiple times. In addition, Nolan's wife, Emma Thomas, has produced all of his films, including Memento, in which she is credited as an associate producer.He often collaborates with his brother, screenwriter Jonathan Nolan, who describes their working relationship in the production notes of The Prestige: "Ive always suspected that it has something to do with the fact that hes left-handed and Im right-handed, because hes somehow able to look at my ideas and flip them around in a way thats just a little bit more twisted and interesting. Its great to be able to work with him like that."[67]Lee Smith has been Nolan's editor since Batman Begins, with Dody Dorn editing Memento and Insomnia. Wally Pfister has served as cinematographer for all of Nolan's films starting with Memento. Production designer Nathan Crowley has worked with Nolan since Insomnia (with the exception of Inception).David Julyan composed music for Following, Memento, Insomnia, and The Prestige, while Hans Zimmer and James Newton Howard provided music for Batman Begins and The Dark Knight. Zimmer scored Inception and The Dark Knight Rises without Howard.From Batman Begins, Nolan has been collaborating with special effects supervisor Chris Corbould, stunt coordinator Tom Struthers and visual effects supervisor Paul Franklin (from Double Negative).As of August 2012[update], Nolan's films have earned a total of over USD$ 1.6 billion at the North American box office, according to Box Office Mojo. The variance is large: his independent debut, Following, was mostly shown at film festivals and earned $48,482 in just two theatres, while The Dark Knight earned $533,345,358 in 4,366 cinemas.[68] According to the UK Film Council in their 2011 Statistical Yearbook, Nolan is the second most commercially successful British director since 2001.[69]1 Early life2 Career

2.1 1990s
2.2 2000s
2.3 2010s

2.1 1990s2.2 2000s2.3 2010s3 Upcoming projects4 Directorial style and collaborations

4.1 Directorial style
4.2 Recurring collaborators

4.1 Directorial style4.2 Recurring collaborators5 Filmography6 Reception7 Publications8 See also9 References10 External links2.1 1990s2.2 2000s2.3 2010s4.1 Directorial style4.2 Recurring collaboratorsNolan, Christopher "Charisma as Natural as Gravity". Christopher Nolan. Newsweek. 2008-01-26. A memoir of Heath Ledger.Nolan, C. (Author); Nolan, Jonah (Preface) (2010), Inception: The Shooting Script, Insight Editions, ISBN1-60887-015-4Nolan, C. (2001), Memento & Following, Faber and Faber, ISBN0-571-22994-8Nolan, C.; Goyer, David, S. (2005), Batman Begins: The Screenplay, Faber and Faber, ISBN0-571-21047-3Syncopy FilmsChristopher Nolan at the Internet Movie DatabaseChristopher Nolan at AllRoviChristopher Nolan at Yahoo! MoviesNolanFans.com Website dedicated to news and information on Nolan's workTelegraph.co.uk Interview with Christopher Nolan and Christian Bale
The Blind Side is a 2009 American semi-biographical sports drama film. It is written and directed by John Lee Hancock, and based on the 2006 book The Blind Side: Evolution of a Game by Michael Lewis.[2][3] The storyline features Michael Oher, an offensive lineman who plays for the Baltimore Ravens of the NFL. The film follows Oher from his impoverished upbringing, through his years at Wingate Christian School (a fictional representation of Briarcrest Christian School in Memphis, Tennessee[4]), his adoption by Sean and Leigh Anne Tuohy, and on to his position as one of the most highly coveted prospects in college football.Sandra Bullock stars alongside Quinton Aaron as Michael Oher, Tim McGraw as Sean Tuohy, and Kathy Bates as Miss Sue.[2] The movie also features appearances by several current and former NCAA coaches, including SEC coaches Houston Nutt and Ed Orgeron (Oher's coaches in college, though Nutt represented Arkansas at the time and therefore does so in the film) and Nick Saban (who was at LSU at the time and represents it in the film), former coaches Lou Holtz, Tommy Tuberville, Phillip Fulmer, as well as recruiting analyst Tom Lemming.[5]The Blind Side was a box-office success, grossing over $300 million. The film was well-received by critics, who most notably praised Sandra Bullock's performance. Bullock went on to win the Academy Award for Best Actress, as well as the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role. The film itself also received an Academy Award nomination for Best Picture.For most of his childhood, 17-year-old Michael Oher (Quinton Aaron) has been in foster care with different families, largely because of his mother's drug addiction, throughout Memphis, Tennessee. Every time he is placed in a new home, he runs away. His friend's father, whose couch Mike had been sleeping on, asks Burt Cotton (Ray McKinnon), the coach of Wingate Christian school, to help enroll his son and Mike. Impressed by Mike's size and athleticism, Cotton gets him admitted despite his abysmal academic record.At his new school, Michael is befriended by a boy named Sean Jr. "SJ" (Jae Head). SJ's mother Leigh Anne Tuohy (Sandra Bullock) is a strong-minded interior designer and the wife of wealthy businessman Sean Tuohy (Tim McGraw). Leigh Anne notices Michael walking on the road, shivering in the cold; when she learns he intends to spend the night huddled outside the school gym, she offers him a place to sleep at her house. The next morning, when she sees Michael leaving, she asks him to spend the Thanksgiving holiday with her family. Slowly, Michael becomes a member of the Tuohy family, even as Leigh Anne's rich friends wonder what she is doing. One even suggests that her teenage daughter Collins (Lily Collins) is not safe around him, much to Leigh Anne's disgust.When Leigh Anne seeks to become Michael's legal guardian, she learns he was separated from his drug-addict mother when he was seven and that no one knows her whereabouts. She is also told that even though he scored low in almost every category in a career aptitude test, he is in the 98th percentile in "protective instincts".After his grades improve, Michael is allowed to join the school football team. He has a shaky start due to his polite and gentle nature, yet after some encouragement by Leigh Anne to tap into his "protective instincts" and regard his teammates as he would members of his family, Michael dominates on the field. SJ sends out videos of the games to college coaches around the country. Leigh Anne discovers that to get a NCAA Division I scholarship, Michael needs a 2.5 GPA, so they hire a tutor, Miss Sue (Kathy Bates). Some of the teachers help out as well, and Michael ends up with a GPA of 2.52.When coaches come to recruit Michael, Leigh Anne makes it clear that she prefers the University of Mississippi (Ole Miss) as both she and her husband are alumni. Miss Sue, another Ole Miss alumna, tells Michael (who dislikes horror films) that the FBI buries body parts under the University of Tennessee's Neyland Stadium for research; Leigh Anne particularly loathes that school. Michael commits to Ole Miss.Subsequently, Michael and the Tuohys become the subject of an NCAA investigation. The investigator tells Michael that the Tuohys and Miss Sue are fervent Mississippi boosters, who are subject to special restrictions, and his high school coach got a job at Ole Miss after Michael chose the school. Michael confronts Leigh Anne, asking her if she only took him in so he would play football for her alma mater. Michael then goes to his birth mother's apartment in the projects. His old friends welcome him, but their leader makes crude remarks about Leigh Anne and Collins. Michael becomes angry and in the ensuing fight subdues his former friends and then flees.Leigh Anne searches for Michael. He finally calls her, and they meet. Leigh Anne tells him she will support any decision he makes. Michael satisfies the investigator by explaining that he chose Ole Miss because his whole family has gone there.Later, Leigh Anne and her family take Michael to the Ole Miss campus to begin college. The film ends with an emotional goodbye between Leigh Anne and Michael. The closing credits show the 2009 NFL Draft with the real Michael Oher being drafted by the Baltimore Ravens in the first round. Photographs of Oher and the real Tuohys follow, with Oher's success in the NFL detailed. The credits include a dedication to director John Lee Hancock's father, a football player and coach who died in 2009.The Blind Side was produced by Alcon Entertainment and released by Warner Bros. According to Reuters, the film's production budget was $29 million. Filming for the school scenes took place at Atlanta International School and The Westminster Schools in Atlanta, Georgia, and it features many of their students as extras. The film premiered on November 17 in New York City and New Orleans and opened in theaters on November 20 in the rest of the United States and in Canada.[6]Academy Award winner Julia Roberts was originally offered Bullock's role, but turned it down.[7] Bullock, who is not outwardly religious, initially turned down the starring role three times due to discomfort with portraying a devout Christian. According to Bullock, she felt she couldn't objectively represent such a person's beliefs on screen.[8] But after a visit with the real Leigh Anne Tuohy, Bullock was not only won over, but also took a pay cut and agreed to receive a percentage of the profits instead.[9]The Blind Side has earned numerous awards and nominations for the lead performance of the film's star, Sandra Bullock.The film received generally positive reviews from critics, with Sandra Bullock's acting being critically acclaimed. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that, as of October 8, 2011(2011 -10-08)[update], 66% of 188 critics have given the film a positive review, with a rating average of 6.1 out of 10. The site's general consensus is that "It might strike some viewers as a little too pat, but The Blind Side has the benefit of strong source material and a strong performance from Sandra Bullock."[10]Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from film critics, has a rating score of 53 based on 28 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews".[11]The Blind Side opened in 3,110 theaters on its opening weekend, the weekend of November 20, 2009. It grossed a strong $34,510,000 in its opening weekend, the second highest gross of that weekend, behind The Twilight Saga: New Moon. It was the highest-grossing opening weekend of Sandra Bullock's career. The per-theater average for The Blind Side's opening weekend was $11,096.[12] In its opening weekend, the movie already proved to be a financial success, having a budget of just $29,000,000. It proved to have remarkable staying power, taking in an additional $9.5 million, bringing its gross to $60,125,000 by the weekend of November 27, 2009.[13] The movie enjoyed a very rare greater success for the second weekend than it did in its opening weekend, taking in an estimated $40 million, an increase of 18 percent, from November 27 to November 29, 2009, coming in second to New Moon once again, bringing its gross to $100,250,000.[1] In its third weekend, the movie continued its trend of rare feats by moving up to the number one position with $20.4 million in sales after spending the previous two weekends in second place for a total gross of $128.8 million, due to strong word-of-mouth.[14] In its fourth weekend, it moved down to second place, dropping a slim 23% with an estimated $15.5 million for a total of $150.2 million in the United States and Canada as of December 13, 2009.[14] The film hit $200 million domestically on January 1, 2010, marking the first time a movie marketed with a sole actress' name above the title (Bullock's) has crossed the $200 million mark.[15] The Blind Side has also become the highest grossing football movie and sports drama of all time domestically [16][17] unadjusted for ticket inflation.[18] The Blind Side ended its domestic theatrical run on June 4, 2010 (nearly 7 months after it opened), earning a total of $255,959,475.[19] In the UK, The Blind Side was released on March 26, 2010.[20] It was the third biggest release of that weekend behind Nanny McPhee and the Big Bang and Tim Burton's Alice in Wonderland.[21]The movie features 23 songs by artists including Les Paul, Young MC, Lucy Woodward, The Books, Canned Heat, Five for Fighting, and film costar Tim McGraw.[22] However, while the score soundtrack by Carter Burwell was released on CD, none of the featured songs were included.The Blind Side was released on DVD and Blu-ray March 23, 2010. The Blind Side was available exclusively for rental from Blockbuster for 28 days.[23]Redbox and Netflix customers had to wait 28 days before they were able to rent the movie.[24][25] This stems from the settlement of a lawsuit brought by Redbox against Warner Home Video, who, in an attempt to boost DVD sales, refused to sell wholesale titles to Redbox. On August 19, 2009 Redbox sued Warner Home Video[26] to continue purchasing DVD titles at wholesale prices. On February 16, 2010, Redbox settled the lawsuit[25] and agreed to a 28-day window past the street date.As of July 18, 2012(2012 -07-18)[update], units sold for the DVD stand at more than 8.4 million copies and has grossed a further $107,459,025 adding to its total gross.[27]November 20, 2009(2009-11-20)1 Plot2 Cast

2.1 Coaches playing themselves

2.1 Coaches playing themselves3 Production4 Reception

4.1 Accolades
4.2 Critical reception
4.3 Box office

4.1 Accolades4.2 Critical reception4.3 Box office5 Soundtrack6 Home media7 References8 External links2.1 Coaches playing themselves4.1 Accolades4.2 Critical reception4.3 Box officeSandra Bullock as Leigh Anne TuohyTim McGraw as Sean TuohyQuinton Aaron as Michael "Big Mike" OherKathy Bates as Miss SueLily Collins as Collins TuohyJae Head as Sean "S.J." Tuohy, Jr.Ray McKinnon as Coach Burt CottonKim Dickens as Mrs. BoswellAdriane Lenox as Denise OherTommy Tuberville, then coach of AuburnNick Saban, then coach of LSULou Holtz, then coach of South CarolinaPhilip Fulmer, then coach of TennesseeHouston Nutt, then coach of ArkansasEd Orgeron, then coach of Ole MissOfficial websiteThe Blind Side at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Blind Side at Box Office MojoThe Blind Side at Rotten TomatoesThe Blind Side at MetacriticThe Blind Side History vs. Hollywood at Chasing the FrogThe Blind Side at The Fan CarpetSandra Bullock Interview at UGR
(500) Days of Summer is a 2009 American comedy drama film. It was written by Scott Neustadter and Michael H. Weber, directed by Marc Webb, produced by Mark Waters, and stars Joseph Gordon-Levitt and Zooey Deschanel. The film employs a nonlinear narrative structure, with the story based upon its male protagonist and his memory-driven look at a failed relationship.[3] Principal photography began in April 2008 in Los Angeles, California.As an independent production, it was picked up for distribution by Fox Searchlight Pictures and premiered at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival. It was a hit with audiences and received a standing ovation at the festival. It later went on wide release in the US on August 7, 2009,[4] on September 2, 2009, in the UK and Ireland, and on September 17, 2009, in Australia.[5]The film went on to achieve widespread success. It garnered critical acclaim and became a successful "sleeper hit", earning over $60 million in worldwide returns, far exceeding its $7.5 million budget. Many critics lauded the film as one of the best from 2009, seeing it featured in many year end lists and drawing comparisons to other acclaimed films such as Annie Hall and High Fidelity.[3][6][7]The film also received numerous awards and nominations; including Scott Neustadter and Michael H. Weber receiving the 2009 Satellite Award for Best Original Screenplay and the Independent Spirit Award for Best Screenplay. Notable nominations included two at the 67th Golden Globe Awards for Best Picture (Musical or Comedy), which it lost to The Hangover, and a nomination for Joseph Gordon-Levitt for Best Actor (Musical or Comedy), who lost to Robert Downey, Jr. for Sherlock Holmes.The film is presented in a nonlinear narrative, as it jumps from various days within the 500-day span of Tom and Summer's relationship, indicated by an animation that includes the day's number; this summary is a linear version of the events of the film.On January 8, Tom Hansen (Joseph Gordon Levitt) meets Summer Finn (Zooey Deschanel), the new assistant to his boss. Tom trained as an architect but works as a writer at a greeting card company in Los Angeles. Following a karaoke night, Tom's friend and co-worker McKenzie (Geoffrey Arend) reveals that Tom is attracted to Summer. During the next few months Summer and Tom grow closer, despite Summer's telling Tom that she does not believe in true love, and does not want a boyfriend.Tom shows Summer his favorite spot in the city, which overlooks a number of buildings he likes, although the view is spoiled by parking lots. After several months of dating, Tom gets into a fight with a man who flirts with Summer, and they have their first argument. On day 290, Summer and Tom end their relationship after they see The Graduate, a film which Tom thinks shows true love. Tom does not take the breakup well, and Tom's friends call his younger sister, Rachel, to calm him down.Summer quits her job at the greeting card company. Tom's boss moves him to the consolations department, as his depression is not suitable for happier events. Months later, as Summer and Tom attend the wedding of a co-worker, they dance at the wedding and Summer catches the bouquet. They sit next to each other on the trip home, and Summer invites Tom to a party at her apartment. He attends the party, but leaves when he sees that Summer is wearing an engagement ring. Tom enters a deep depression, only leaving his apartment for alcohol and junk food. After a few days, he returns to work with a hangover and after an emotional outburst, quits his job. He decides to rededicate himself to architecture, makes a list of firms, and begins to attend interviews.On day 488, Summer sees Tom at his favorite spot in the city, and they talk. Tom states his lack of understanding towards her actions. Summer explains that he was right about the existence of true love and that she discovered in someone else all the feelings she had never been sure about with Tom. Summer holds Tom's hand. She says she is glad to see Tom is doing well. As she leaves Tom tells her he really hopes she is happy.Twelve days later, on Wednesday, May 23, he attends a job interview and meets a girl who is also applying for the same job. They talk, and Tom learns she shares his favorite spot and dislike for the parking lots. Before entering the interview, he makes a date to have coffee with her afterwards. He asks her name, and she replies "Autumn".The style of film is presented in a nonlinear narrative. Each scene is introduced using a title card showing which of the 500 days it is.The film begins with a disclaimer: "Any resemblance to people living or dead is purely coincidental ... Especially you, Jenny Beckman ... Bitch."[8] Co-writer of the film Scott Neustadter admitted the film was based on a real romance. Neustadter explains that when he met the real girl who inspired the character Summer as a student at the London School of Economics in 2002, he was rebounding from a bad breakup back home, and promptly fell "crazily, madly, hopelessly in love" with the girl who "returned his kisses but not his ardor." The ending of the relationship was "painfully and unforgettably awful," which prompted him to co-write the film with Michael H. Weber. When Neustadter later showed the script to Summer's real life counterpart, she said she related more to the Tom character.[9][10] Weber also stated that, "we've all been in the trenches of love, we've all gone through the highs and lows, so Scott and I felt that the only way to tell this story was to come at it from a completely real place. It was pretty interesting for us because Scott was just going through a break-up and I was in a long-term relationship, so we each brought a totally opposite perspective, living it and not living it, and I think that tension helped to bring out more of the comedy".[11]Director Webb has described the film as more of a "coming of age" story as opposed to a "rom-com". He stated, "We arrive at a different conclusion, for one thing. Plus, most romantic comedies are more loyal to a formula than to emotional truth. It's about happiness, and learning that you'll find it within yourself, rather than in the big blue eyes of the girl in the cubicle down the hall. I wanted to make an unsentimental movie and an uncynical movie. In my mind, I wanted it to be something you could dance to. That's why we put a parenthesis in the title it's like a pop song in movie form. It's not a big film. It's not about war or poverty. It's about 500 days in a young guy's relationship, but it's no less deserving of scrutiny. When your heart is first broken, it consumes you. And it's an emotion I wanted to make a movie about, before I forgot how it felt".[11] Webb also stated that Deschanel's character, Summer, is based on a stock character type; "Yes, Summer is an immature view of a woman. She's Tom's view of a woman. He doesn't see her complexity and the consequence for him is heartbreak. In Tom's eyes, Summer is perfection, but perfection has no depth. Summer's not a girl, she's a phase."[11] Gordon-Levitt explained that he was drawn to the role of Tom because of his relatability to the character. "I've had my heart broken before. Truly, truly broken. But when I look back at me in my heartbroken phase, it's pretty hilarious, because it felt so much more extreme than it really was. One of the things I love about (500) Days of Summer is that it doesn't make light of what we go through in romances, but it is honest about it and shows it for what it is, which is often profoundly funny".[11]David Ng of the Los Angeles Times describes architecture as a star of the film.[12] The film was originally set in San Francisco but was later moved to Los Angeles and the script rewritten to make better use of the location.[13] Buildings used include the Los Angeles Music Center (which includes the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion) and the towers of California Plaza.[12] The older Fine Arts Building is featured in the film, in a scene where Tom shows it to Summer and mentions its designers, Walker and Eisen, two of his favorite architects, although he incorrectly gives the partners' names as "Walker and Eisner."Christopher Hawthorne of the Los Angeles Times describes the film as having "finely honed sense of taste" to include the Bradbury Building where Tom goes for his job interview.[14][15]To help promote the film, Gordon-Levitt and Deschanel starred in the debut episode of Microsoft Zune and Mean Magazine's "Cinemash" series. In the episode, they "mash" the characters from the film Sid and Nancy with story elements from 500 Days of Summer.[16]Marc Webb created a music video as a companion piece to the film, titled "The Bank Heist". It features Deschanel and Gordon-Levitt dancing to "Why Do You Let Me Stay Here?", a song by Deschanel's folk group She & Him.[2]The film made its debut at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival. It proved a huge success and received a standing ovation from festival crowds upon screening.[17] In Europe, 500 Days premiered in Switzerland as the opening film of the 62nd Locarno Film Festival.[18]Filmed independently, it was picked up for distribution by Fox Searchlight Pictures and opened in US and Canadian limited release on July 17, 2009, later expanding to wide release in the US on August 7, 2009.[4] It was later also released on September 2, 2009, in the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland, and opened in Australia on September 17, 2009.[5] (500) Days of Summer was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc on December 22, 2009 in North America.[19] As of October 2010, the DVD format has sold 759,081 copies, earning $11,382,604 in consumer revenue.[20] It was released on the same formats in the UK on January 18, 2010,[21] and in Australia on February 10, 2010.[22]Upon the film's initial limited release in the U.S, it was expected to become the "breakout indie hit of the summer".[23] Later, during its full opening weekend, the film grossed twenty-seven times its original budget cost,[11] making it one of the most successful "sleeper hits" of the year.[24] By September 8, the film had taken in $1.9 million from 318 screens in the United Kingdom. This was regarded as a successful five-day opening by Fox Searchlight, earning around half as much as the science-fiction blockbuster District 9, which took in $3.5 million.[25] As of February 25, 2010 the film has grossed $32,391,374 in the United States and Canada and $60,722,734 worldwide.[20]The film received acclaim from critics upon its release. Based on over 200 professional reviews, it obtained a "Certified Fresh" seal on Rotten Tomatoes with an approval rating of 87% and an average score of 7.6/10. The consensus describes the film as "clever and offbeat," as well as "refreshingly honest and utterly charming". Furthermore, 89% of the site's 35 selected, notable critics gave the film positive reviews.[3] Later, at the website's year-end "Golden Tomato Awards", which honored the best reviewed films of 2009, it placed second in the romantic category.[26] At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the film has received an average score of 76% based on 36 reviews.[27]Response in the American press was positive. Film critic Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film four stars out of four. He described the film as "a delightful comedy, alive with invention". He particularly praised the strong performances of Gordon-Levitt and Deschanel and summarized his review by adding, "Here is a rare movie that begins by telling us how it will end and is about how the hero has no idea why".[28] Premiere also awarded the film four stars out of four, stating "Much like the actual summer (the season, not the character), we never wanted it to end".[29]Michael Ordoa of the Los Angeles Times gave a positive review. He wrote, "(500) Days of Summer is something seldom seen: an original romantic comedy. It bristles with energy, emotion and intellect, as it flits about the dizzying highs and weeping-karaoke lows of a passionate entanglement".[30] Dana Stevens of Slate also praised the film and described it as, "a keeper. It's fun both to watch and to talk about afterward, and it possesses the elusive rom-com sine qua non: two equally appealing leads who bounce wonderfully off each other".[31]Lou Lumenick of the New York Post awarded the film three stars out of four. He praised the directing of Marc Webb, stating, "it's the oldest bittersweet story in the book, of course, but music-video director Marc Webb approaches his feature debut with great confidence, flair and a minimum of schmaltz. That's the whole guy-centric point of (500) Days of Summer, though. Sometimes you never, ever truly figure out why these mysterious creatures break your heart".[32]Entertainment Weekly critic Owen Gleiberman gave the film an "A", and also praised the originality of the story; "Most romantic comedies have half a dozen situations at best: Meet Cute, Infatuation, Pop Song Montage, Contrived Mix-Up, Angry Breakup, and Final Clinch. (500) Days of Summer is about the many unclassifiable moments in between. It's a feat of star acting, and it helps make (500) Days not just bitter or sweet but everything in between".[33]Film Threat critic Scott Knopf gave the film a maximum five-star rating and called the script "fantastic". He also lauded the films innovative nature; "Of course they meet. Of course they fall for each other. Of course there are problems. It sounds clich but what's remarkable about 500 Days is how the film explores new ways to tell the world's oldest story". He concluded that the film was "the best romantic comedy since Love Actually."[34]Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film three and a half stars out of four. He wrote, "Boy meets girl, boy loses girl. It's been done to emo death. That's why the sublimely smart-sexy-joyful-sad (500) Days of Summer hits you like a blast of pure romantic oxygen" and concludes: "(500) Days is otherwise a different kind of love story: an honest one that takes a piece out of you".[35] IGN critic Eric Goldman scored the film at 9.0/10 upon his review of the blu-ray release. He praised the film as "one of the best of 2009" and particularly complimented the innovative nature of the story in an often clichd genre; "(500) Days of Summer proved there is a way to bring something fresh and new to one of the most cliche and often frustrating genres  the romantic comedy".[36] The New York Times[37] and Empire gave the film 4/5.[38]The A.V. Club also gave the film favourable reviews with a B- grade.[39]NPR was more dismissive: "For all its rhetorical whimsy and hipster dressings, (500) Days of Summer is a thoroughly conservative affair, as culturally and romantically status quo as any Jennifer Aniston vehicle."[40] Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal was also more critical, calling it, "synthetic and derivative, a movie thats popping with perceptions while searching for a style."[41]British newspaper The Times likewise gave a mixed review. Despite Toby Young awarding the film three stars out of five, he critiqued, "It is hardly the freshest romantic comedy of past 20 years. Taking the best bits from other movies and rearranging them in a non-linear sequence does not make for an original film."[42] The Guardian film critic Peter Bradshaw said the film was "let down by sitcom cliches, and by being weirdly incurious about the inner life of its female lead."[43]Mark Adams of the Daily Mirror, though, gave the film a glowing review, awarding it a full five stars, and writing, "It is a modern romance for grown-ups... a sweet-natured, funny, deeply-romantic tale that brims with energy and is blessed with top-notch performances by Deschanel and Gordon-Levitt, who are both charming and have real chemistry".[44] Chris Tookey of the Daily Mail was also impressed and described the film as "delightful and endearing", awarding four stars out of five. He wrote, "For the young, this is a worthwhile cautionary tale. If you're of more mature vintage, it will make you remember how it felt to be naive, energised by first love and mortified when that certain someone turned out not to love you nearly as much as you would have liked".[45] The film was also included in several "Top Ten" year end lists for 2009 by various film critics.Scott Neustadter and Michael H. Weber received numerous awards for their screenplay; including the 2009 Hollywood Film Festival's Hollywood Breakthrough Screenwriter Award on October 26, 2009,[51] the Satellite Award for Best Original Screenplay,[52] the Southeastern Film Critics Association Award for Best Original Screenplay (with the film also being named in the Top Ten Films of the Year),[53] as well as the Las Vegas Film Critics Society Award for Best Screenplay.[54]Alan Edward Bell won the San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Editing,[55] as well as the film being named one of the ten best movies of the year by the National Board of Review Awards 2009.[50] The film also received two nominations at the 67th Golden Globe Awards announced on December 15, 2009, for Best Picture (Comedy or Musical) and for Joseph Gordon-Levitt for Best Actor (Comedy or Musical). It has been nominated for four Independent Spirit Awards and won the award for Best Screenplay. It received a nomination for the People's Choice Award.The film features a musical sequence after Tom and Summer first spend the night together. As Tom walks to work, he is overjoyed and struts down the street in a grand musical number set to the Hall & Oates song "You Make My Dreams" and others join his dance.[2]The soundtrack for the film was released on July 14, 2009. The soundtrack peaked at #42 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart.[57]iTunes Bonus TracksMason NovickJessica TuchinskyMark WatersSteven J. WolfeScott G. HymanScott NeustadterMichael H. WeberJoseph Gordon-LevittZooey DeschanelMychael DannaRob SimonsenJanuary 17, 2009(2009-01-17) (Sundance)August 7, 2009(2009-08-07) (United States)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Writing
3.2 Direction
3.3 Locations
3.4 Marketing

3.1 Writing3.2 Direction3.3 Locations3.4 Marketing4 Release

4.1 Home media

4.1 Home media5 Reception

5.1 Box office
5.2 Critical reception
5.3 Accolades

5.1 Box office5.2 Critical reception5.3 Accolades6 Awards7 Music

7.1 Soundtrack

7.1 Soundtrack8 References9 External links3.1 Writing3.2 Direction3.3 Locations3.4 Marketing4.1 Home media5.1 Box office5.2 Critical reception5.3 Accolades7.1 SoundtrackJoseph Gordon-Levitt as Tom Hansen, a trained architect who works as a writer at a greeting card company.Zooey Deschanel as Summer Finn, assistant to Tom's boss and romantic interest of Tom.Chlo Grace Moretz as Rachel Hansen, Tom's younger sister. She supports Tom during hard times.Geoffrey Arend as McKenzie, Tom's co-worker at the greeting card company.Matthew Gray Gubler as Paul, one of Tom's friends.Clark Gregg as Vance, Tom's boss.Rachel Boston as Alison, Tom's blind date.Minka Kelly as AutumnMaile Flanagan as RhodaPatricia Belcher as MillieRichard McGonagle as NarratorOlivia Bagg as Young SummerOfficial website(500) Days of Summer at the Internet Movie Database(500) Days of Summer at AllRovi(500) Days of Summer at Box Office Mojo(500) Days of Summer at Rotten Tomatoes(500) Days of Summer at Metacritic
Up in the Air is a 2009 American comedy-drama film directed by Jason Reitman and co-written by Reitman and Sheldon Turner. It is a film adaptation of the 2001 novel of the same name, written by Walter Kirn. The plot centres around a corporate "downsizer" Ryan Bingham (George Clooney) and his travels. The film follows his isolated life and philosophies along with the people he meets along the way. Filming was primarily in St. Louis, Missouri, which substituted for a number of other cities shown in the film. Several scenes were also filmed in Detroit, Michigan; Omaha, Nebraska; Las Vegas, Nevada; and Miami, Florida.Reitman heavily promoted Up in the Air with personal appearances during film festivals and other showings, starting with the Telluride Film Festival on September 5, 2009. The Los Angeles premiere was at the Mann Village Theater on Monday, November 30, 2009. Paramount scheduled a limited North American release on December 4, 2009, broadening the release on December 11, 2009, with a wide release on December 23, 2009.Up in the Air was well received and was recognized from numerous critics' associations, including the National Board of Review and the Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association, which named the film Best Picture of 2009. It received eight Broadcast Film Critics Association nominations and garnered a win for Adapted Screenplay, six Golden Globe nominations, earning a win for Best Screenplay, and three Screen Actors Guild nominations. It received six Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture.Ryan Bingham (George Clooney) works for the Career Transitions Corporation (CTC). He makes his living traveling to workplaces around the United States and informing workers of their dismissals in place of their employers, who fear doing it themselves. Ryan also delivers motivational speeches, using the metaphor "What's In Your Backpack?" to extol the virtues of a life free of burdens like relationships with people as well as things, arguing that the best way to live is to travel light, with little to hold one down.Ryan relishes his perpetual travels. Already entitled to Concierge Key program by American Airlines, his personal ambition is to earn ten million frequent flyer miles. While traveling, he meets another frequent flyer, Alex (Vera Farmiga). They begin a casual relationship, meeting whenever they can arrange to cross paths.Ryan is unexpectedly called back to CTC's offices in Omaha, Nebraska. An ambitious, freshly graduated new hire, Natalie Keener (Anna Kendrick), is promoting a plan to cut costs by conducting layoffs via videoconferencing. Ryan argues that Natalie knows nothing about the actual process, live or not, as she has never fired anyone and does not know how to handle upset people. He plays the role of a fired employee to show her inexperience. His boss (Jason Bateman) assigns him to take Natalie with him on his next round of terminations, much to his annoyance. Throughout the rounds, Natalie is visibly disturbed by firing people face to face.As they travel together and become better acquainted, Natalie questions Ryan's philosophy, but he is satisfied with his lifestyle. During the trip, Natalie is shattered when her boyfriend unceremoniously dumps her by text message. Ryan and Alex try to comfort her. Natalie later lectures Ryan about his refusal to consider a commitment to Alex in spite of their obvious compatibility, and becomes infuriated; she apologizes later, but soon afterwards they are ordered back to Omaha to begin implementing Natalie's program. There are problems during a test run; one laid-off man breaks down in tears before the camera, and she is unable to comfort him.Instead of returning immediately to Omaha, Ryan convinces Alex to accompany him to his younger sister Julie's (Melanie Lynskey) wedding near Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Julie had him (and others) take photos of a cutout picture of her and future husband Jim (Danny McBride) in various places because they cannot afford a honeymoon trip. When Jim gets cold feet, Ryan's older sister talks Ryan into using his motivational skills to persuade Jim to go through with it. Although this runs counter to Ryan's personal philosophy of non-commitment, he persuades Jim that "everyone needs a co-pilot" and the important moments in life are rarely unshared. The wedding takes place without any further problems.Ryan begins having second thoughts about his own life. As he starts to deliver his "What's In Your Backpack?" speech at a convention in Las Vegas, he realizes he no longer believes it and walks off the stage. On an impulse, he flies to Alex's home in Chicago, Illinois. When she opens the door, he is stunned to discover she is a married woman with children; Ryan leaves without saying a word. She later tells him on the phone that her family is her real life and he is simply an escape. When she asks him what he wants out of their relationship, he is unable to answer.On his flight home, the crew announces that Ryan has just crossed the ten-million-mile mark. The airline's chief pilot (Sam Elliott) comes out of the cockpit to meet Ryan. He notes that Ryan is the youngest person to reach the milestone; Ryan, who had been preparing for that moment for a long time, shows little emotion.Back in his office, Ryan calls the airline to transfer five hundred thousand miles each to the newlyweds, enough for them to fly around the world for their honeymoon. His boss then tells Ryan that a woman he and Natalie fired has killed herself by jumping off a bridge, just as she warned them she would, and that when Natalie found out, she quit via text message. Ryan claims to have no memory of the employee making this threat. The company puts the remote-layoff program on hold because of government concerns, and Ryan is once again "back on the road".Natalie applies for a job in San Francisco, California. The interviewer is puzzled as to why she chose to work for CTC, given her sterling qualifications; she tells him she followed a boy. Based on a glowing recommendation from Ryan, he hires her. The film concludes with Ryan standing in front of a vast destination board, looking up, and letting go of his luggage.The film has a thematic connection to the children's book The Velveteen Rabbit, which appears in the film, before the wedding.[6]Reitman noted thatIn one sense, it's a movie about a man who fires people for a living. In another sense, it's a movie about a man who collects air miles excessively. In another sense, it's about a man who meets a woman who's so similar to him that even though they both believe in the idea of living solo, they begin to fall in love.[7]Reitman also later stated that "the movie is about the examination of a philosophy. What if you decided to live hub to hub, with nothing, with nobody?"[8]Walter Kirn wrote Up in the Air, the book on which the film is based, during a snowbound winter on a ranch in rural Montana, while thinking about airports, airplanes and first-class passengers he had met who would strongly resemble Ryan Bingham.[9] The novel was published in 2001 and, shortly after, Sheldon Turner discovered the book and wrote a screenplay adaptation, which he sold to DreamWorks in 2003.[10]Canadian-American filmmaker Jason Reitman later came upon the novel (initially attracted by the Christopher Buckley blurb on the cover) while browsing in the Los Angeles bookstore Book Soup.[11][12] Reitman persuaded his father, Canadian-American filmmaker Ivan Reitman, to purchase the book's film rights, and the elder Reitman commissioned a screenplay from Ted Griffin and Nicholas Griffin, who used some elements from Turner's script in their own work. Jason Reitman then developed his own screenplay, incorporating some of the original script that was (unbeknownst to Reitman) written by Turner. Some of Turner's inventions that were used in the final film include Ryan's boilerplate termination speech ("Anyone who ever built an empire or changed the world sat where you're sitting right now..."), a key plot point involving a suicide, and the character of Ryan's partner (written by Turner as male).[12][13] Reitman initially attempted to claim sole credit for writing the film, and later admitted to being confused when the Writers Guild of America ruled that he should share credit with Turner, whose script Reitman claimed to have never read. He and Turner later appeared at a WGA event where both said they were happy to share credit, after Turner's contribution to the final product had been made clear.[12][13] At a press screening, Reitman also said that his father Ivan had written "the best line in the movie."[14]Though Reitman has claimed in countless interviews that he wrote the parts specifically for George Clooney, Vera Farmiga, Anna Kendrick, Jason Bateman, Danny McBride, Melanie Lynskey, Amy Morton, Sam Elliott and Zach Galifianakis,[15][16] some of his actors have publicly stated their confusion in Reitman's assertion, if only because they knew he was meeting other actors all along including for his choice to fill his last lead role with Ellen Page (who starred in Reitman's previous film Juno) for the part that Kendrick ultimately played.[17] On the part played by Farmiga, he cited her ability to walk a fine line between aggressiveness and femininity. On Kendrick, Reitman cited that he was inspired by her performance in Rocket Science. On Clooney, he said, "If you're going to make a movie about a guy who fires people for a living and you still want to like him, that actor better be damn charming and I don't think there's a more charming actor alive than George Clooney. I was very lucky he said yes."[18] Reitman said, on the B.S. Report with Bill Simmons, that he considered Steve Martin for the part if Clooney declined the role. Reitman said that he would have changed the movie with Martin and given Martin "his Lost in Translation."[19][20]Approximately 4,600 people applied to be extras in the film during the open call on January 24, 2009 and January 25, 2009, at Crestwood Court in St. Louis, Missouri.[21] Up in the Air cast 2,000 extras[22] with 15 to 25 Missouri actors in minor speaking roles. About 250 extras were used from the Omaha, Nebraska, area. They were used for filming inside and outside the terminal at Eppley Airfield, while Clooney shot most of his scenes inside the terminal.[23]While shooting the film in St. Louis and Detroit, Reitman placed an ad in the paper asking if people who recently lost their job wanted to be in a documentary about job loss. He specified "documentary" in the ad so actors would not respond to the ad. Reitman was amazed by how many people of different age, race, and gender were willing to speak frankly about what happened and what a cathartic experience it was for these people.[24] They received a startling number of responses, with 100 responses, including 60 people on camera (30 in Detroit and 30 in St. Louis).[25] Twenty-two made it into the film.[26] They interviewed them for about ten minutes on what it is like to lose their job in this kind of economy, and after that they would "fire" them on camera and ask them to either respond the way they did the day they lost their job or, if they preferred, the way they wished they had responded.[9][27][28]Filming was mostly done in the St. Louis area. Several scenes were also filmed at the Berry and McNamara Terminals at Detroit Metro Airport in late February 2009[29][30] with minimal filming in Omaha, in Las Vegas[31] and in Miami, Florida.[32] Missouri and St. Louis leaders provided $4.1 million in tax credits for the $25 million film.[33] Producers set up a St. Louis, Missouri production office on January 5, 2009.[34] Filming began in St. Louis on March 3, 2009 and continued through the end of April.[21] The film includes 80 different sets at 50 locations throughout the St. Louis area, including Lambert-St. Louis International Airport Concourse C and Concourse D[34][35] (which played the part of several airports around the country), the Mansion House apartments in downtown St. Louis,[22] Hilton St. Louis at the Ballpark, Hilton St. Louis Airport,[36] the Cheshire Inn, the GenAmerica building, Renaissance Grand Hotel, Maplewood United Methodist Church and Affton High School.[37] The film was shot at Lambert-St. Louis International Airport for five days, twenty hours each day.[38]In October 2008 Production Services of Omaha scouted locations in Omaha, Nebraska[39] for three days of filming in late April with Clooney.[40][41] Some of the scenes were shot inside the Visitor's Bureau and in a condo in the Old Market area of downtown Omaha[42] and at the south end of the main terminal at Eppley Airfield.[23]Reitman needed fifty days to film Up in the Air, eight of which were devoted to aerial shooting. The aerial shots turned out to be more difficult than he had expected. He was unable to use three days of the aerial filming. Many of the aerial shots, such as the crop circle on fire, are featured in the trailer but are not used in the film. The pilot who flies the Boeing 747 that carries the space shuttle flew the aircraft used for the aerial shots.[15][16]The film features heavy product placement, with American Airlines,[43] Chrysler, Hertz, Travelpro, and Hilton Hotels[43] all featured prominently.[44][45] Competing brands are displayed only as blurs in scene backgrounds or are replaced with pseudonyms in dialogue. However, the brands did not pay for the exposure; rather, they exchanged shooting locations, such as AA's airport areas and Hilton hotels.[46] Reitman expressed his desire to use real brands as he finds them less distracting.[46]The post-production schedule for Up in the Air was shorter than Jason Reitman's previous two films. The editing team had only 16 to 17 weeks post-schedule, whereas usually the editing deadline is from 22 to 26 weeks. Reitman was involved in post-production during shooting. The film was shot entirely on location and Glauberman stayed in L.A. to cut. She would send him scenes every day or every other day as she finished them, and he would look at them. He flew home every weekend to work with her for a few hours on Saturdays or Sundays in order to stay on schedule.[47]Editing helped determine how nonverbal moments shape the first meeting between Ryan and Alex, who become lovers. "In a scene like that, there is a sort of playfulness that goes on," editor, Dana E. Glauberman said. "There were little looks that they gave each other. Sometimes I stayed a beat longer on a take to get that little sparkle in their eyes...You can see a lot of playfulness in the quick cuts back and forth when they are teasing each other, but then there are also certain moments that Vera would give a little raise of an eyebrow, or George would give the same thing. Those tiny nuances are really helpful to show their character and show what they are after."[48]Up in the Air is the official soundtrack to the film, released by Warner Music on November 9, 2009,[49] and composed by Rolfe Kent, who recorded his score with a 55-piece ensemble of the Hollywood Studio Symphony at the Sony Scoring Stage. It was orchestrated by Tony Blondal[50]Kevin Renick wrote the song "Up in the Air" two years prior to knowing that Reitman was working on a film adaptation to the book.[51] He had been laid off at the time, and was an unrecorded, unemployed St. Louis musician. When Renick researched the film he discovered that the theme of the film was much the same as the song he had written. "The song is about uncertainty, disconnection and loneliness, while alluding to career transition," Renick explained. "It's a melancholy song, and a narrative about finding out where your life's going to go."[52] He handed a cassette to Reitman after the director did an interview at Webster University. Renick included a spoken-word introduction about the song on the cassette so that Reitman would know why he was giving the song to him. Reitman found a tape deck, listened, liked the song and placed the original introduction and song from the cassette midway through the credits. Reitman stated that the song has a do-it-yourself authenticity.[53][54][55]Reitman heavily promoted Up in the Air with personal appearances during film festivals and other showings. He stated that he could relate to and enjoys the idea of Ryan Bingham's lifestyle. "Yesterday [October 28, 2009] I took my 10th flight in 10 days so I live that life myself and I kinda enjoy it," Reitman said, "I think when you're in an airplane it's the last refuge for the people who enjoy being alone and reading a book."[56]Reitman documented his experiences promoting the film. He took photos of everyone who interviewed him and recorded videos in each and every city he visited. He edited these images together into a short video titled "Lost In The Air: The Jason Reitman Press Tour Simulator".[57]Up in the Air was screened as a "sneak preview" at the Telluride Film Festival on September 6, 2009, before its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) on September 12.[58][59][60][61] The film was initially not scheduled to be completed for another three months, but Reitman rushed production in order to maintain a streak of debuting his films at TIFF.[62]During October and November 2009, Up in the Air screened at festivals including the Aspen Filmfest,[63] the Woodstock Film Festival,[64] the Hamptons International Film Festival,[65] the Mill Valley Film Festival,[66] the Austin Film Festival,[56] the London Film Festival,[67] the St. Louis International Film Festival,[51][68] the Starz Denver Film Festival,[69] and the Stockholm International Film Festival.[70] It was the only American film to compete for the Golden Marc'Aurelio Audience Award for Best Film at the International Rome Film Festival.[71] On November 6, The New York Times film critic Janet Maslin interviewed Reitman and Kirn at the Jacob Burns Film Center following a screening of the film.[72]Following the positive response the film received at the Telluride Film Festival, Paramount intended to move Up in the Air from its original release date of December 4, 2009, planning for a November 13 limited release going wide before the Thanksgiving holiday.[73][74] However, this schedule conflicted with the release of The Men Who Stare at Goats, another Clooney film.[75][76] The film was eventually released on December 4 in fifteen theaters spanning twelve markets, broadening in the next week to 72 theaters and going into wide release on December 23, 2009.[77][78][79] It was released in other countries beginning in early 2010.[80]Up in the Air was shown at a sneak preview on September 5, 2009 and September 6, 2009 at the Telluride Film Festival.[81][82] Reitman had fueled speculation that he would give a sneak preview at that festival.[60] He posted pictures from Telluride on his Twitter account.[83] Prior to the first showing, people waited for two hours to get into Up in the Air and hundreds were turned away.[84]The world premiere for Up in the Air occurred at 2009's Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) which ran from September 10 to 19, 2009.[85][86] The press showing was on Friday September 11, 2009.[87][88] Public screenings were on September 12, 13 and 19.[89] Reitman originally did not plan to debut the film at TIFF, since it was not scheduled to be ready for another three months. He rushed production so he could keep his Toronto debut streak going.[62]The first clip of the film debuted on Apple Inc. website on September 8, 2009.[90] The first trailer became available on iTunes on September 10, 2009 and on September 18, 2009 it screened before the new movies The Informant! and Love Happens.[91] The second trailer became available on October 1, 2009.[92][93]Reitman received Aspen Film's first New Directions Award and participated in a question and answer session following a screening of Up in the Air on Friday October 2, 2009 at the Wheeler Opera House. The Aspen Filmfest runs from September 30, 2009 through October 4, 2009.[63][94][95] It was shown twice at the Tinker Street Cinema on the closing day of the Tenth Annual Woodstock Film Festival 2009 on October 4, 2009. Vera Farmiga and Lucy Liu participated in a question and answer session moderated by entertainment journalist Martha Frankel after the film and in the Sunday noontime WFF Actor's Dialogue panel.[64][96][97][98] The 2009 Hamptons International Film Festival showed Up in the Air on October 10, 2009 during its run at Long Island, New York's east end October 812, 2009.[65][99]The Spotlight Tribute held during the 32nd edition of Mill Valley Film Festival hosted an interview with Reitman and a screening of Up in the Air on Wednesday October 14, 2009 in the Smith Rafael Film Center, San Rafael, California. The Mill Valley Film Festival ran from October 818, 2009.[66] It was also shown four times at the 53rd London Film Festival which was held from October 1419, 2009.[67][100] Up in the Air was the only American film to compete for the Golden Marc'Aurelio Audience Award for Best Film at the fourth annual International Rome Film Festival which ran October 1523, 2009. It was shown three times October 1719, 2009.[71][101][102] Reitman showed Up in the Air at ShowEast in Orlando, Florida on October 2627, 2009 and asked for the movie theater owners and managers to support the picture as fervently as they did his film Juno two years ago. Reitman also held a Q&A and pep talk with film students at the University of Central Florida.[103][104]The first St. Louis press screening happened on October 28, 2009 at the Tivoli Theater.[105] Up in the Air closed the Austin Film Festival on October 29, 2009 at the Paramount. Reitman attended the screening. The Austin Film Festival ran from October 2229, 2009.[56][106] The Palm Springs International Film Society showed Up in the Air on Thursday, October 29, 2009 at the Regal Cinemas in Palm Springs, California. Anna Kendrick was present at the showing.[107]Vera Farmiga and Anna Kendrick hosted a screening of Up in the Air at the Paris theatre, New York, New York on Thursday, November 5, 2009.[108][109] On November 6, 2009 the New York City Apple Store in SoHo hosted a conversation with director Jason Reitman.[110] On November 6, 2009 The New York Times critic Janet Maslin interviewed Reitman and Kirn during a question and answer session which was held at the Jacob Burns Film Center after a screening of Up in the Air. The question and answer session was followed by a reception in the Jane Peck gallery.[72] The Boston Sunday Night Film Club had a free screening on Sunday, November 8, 2009 with a Q&A session with Reitman following the screening.[111]Up in the Air was the centerpiece for the 18th Annual St. Louis International Film Festival, which was held November 1222, 2009. It was shown November 14, 2009 at the Tivoli Theater in University City, Missouri with Jason Reitman and Michael Beugg in attendance.[112] Kevin Renick, a St. Louis musician who wrote the song Up in the Air, performed half an hour prior to the screening.[51] Yukon Jake, who performed during the wedding scene in Up in the Air, provided entertainment during the party held prior to the screening. The party took place at the St. Louis Ballpark Hilton and the Airport Hilton. Both are featured in the film.[68][113]On November 14, 2009, Paramount flew 50 members of the press to New York with Anna Kendrick, Sad Brad Smith and representatives of American Airlines to promote Up in the Air. The film was shown on the aircraft's video monitors during the flight from New York to Los Angeles. American Airlines provided the Boeing 767 gratis. Smith performed a few songs including Help Yourself in the aisle of the aircraft.[114][115][116] On November 18, 2009 Back Stage and Paramount Pictures had a special screening of Up in the Air for Screen Actors Guild and Back Stage members at The Paramount Theatre (on the Paramount Lot), Los Angeles, California. The screening of the film was followed by a conversation with the cast members Vera Farmiga and Anna Kendrick.[117] The Starz Denver Film Festival closed on November 22, 2009 with a screening of Up in the Air with an introduction by J.K. Simmons, who was in town to accept the fest's Cassavetes award earlier that afternoon.[69] The 20th Stockholm International Film Festival which ran November 1829, 2009 closed with a screening of Up in the Air on November 29, 2009.[70]The film was released in both DVD and Blu-ray Disc formats on March 9, 2010,[118] and sold 536,441 units in its first week of release, worth $9,114,133 of consumer spending. To date the film has sold 1,162,509 home copies, equivalent to $18,517,122 of sales.[119]The film was first released in only 15 theaters in the U.S. and ranked number 13. It took in $1,181,450, with $78,763 per theater. After three days it expanded to 72 theaters and took in $2,394,344 ($33,255 per theater), during the second weekend.[121] During its third weekend, it broke into the top 10 as it widened to 175 theaters ahead of its nationwide expansion on December 23, 2009. It came in at number 8 with $3,210,132$18,344 per theater.[122] The film expanded to 1,895 theaters on December 23. It completed its domestic run on April 8, 2010 with a total domestic gross of $83,823,381, and received a worldwide gross of $163,220,494.[3]The film received critical acclaim from film critics.[128] Review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes reports that 90% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 241 reviews, with a rating average of 8.1 out of 10. The critical consensus is: "Led by charismatic performances by its three leads, director Jason Reitman delivers a smart blend of humor and emotion with just enough edge for mainstream audiences."[124] Among Rotten Tomatoes' "Top Critics", which consists of popular and notable critics from the top newspapers, websites, television and radio programs, the film holds an overall approval rating of 92%, based on a sample of 37 reviews.[129] Metacritic, which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from film critics, has a rating score of 83 based on 36 reviews.[123] The sneak preview of Up in the Air was the highest profile hit during the Telluride film festival.[130] The film also tied for third place in the Toronto International Film Festival indieWire poll.[131]Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times wrote, "Up in the Air makes it look easy. Not just in its casual and apparently effortless excellence, but in its ability to blend entertainment and insight, comedy and poignancy, even drama and reality, things that are difficult by themselves but a whole lot harder in combination. This film does all that and never seems to break a sweat."[132] Entertainment Weekly's Owen Gleiberman agreed, rating the film an A as a "rare and sparkling gem of a movie, directed by Jason Reitman with the polish of a master."[125]Claudia Puig of USA Today praised the film's sense of timeliness, writing, "It's tough to capture an era while it's still happening, yet Up in the Air does so brilliantly, with wit and humanity...Reitman emerges as a modern-day Frank Capra, capturing the nation's anxieties and culture of resilience."[133] Stephen Saito of IFC.com wrote, "It touches on larger themes of mass unemployment, cultural alienation and technology as a crutch. But ultimately, it's really an expertly done character study that's a dramatic change of pace from director Jason Reitman's previous two films."[134] Jonathan Romney of The Independent wrote "Its cynical wit almost places it in the Billy Wilder bracket: Up In The Air is as eloquent about today's executive culture as The Apartment was about that of 1960. It is a brutal, desolate film  but also a superb existential rom-com, and the most entertaining lesson in contemporary socio-economics that you could hope for."[135] Roger Ebert gave the film four stars and wrote, "This isn't a comedy. If it were, it would be hard to laugh in these last days of 2009. Nor is it a tragedy. It's an observant look at how a man does a job."[126]Calling the film "a slickly engaging piece of lightweight existentialism," Todd McCarthy wrote in Variety that "Clooney owns his role in the way first-rate film stars can, so infusing the character with his own persona that everything he does seems natural and right. The timing in the Clooney-Farmiga scenes is like splendid tennis."[127] The New York Times' Manohla Dargis especially appreciated the film's strong female roles, noting that "the ferocious Ms. Kendrick, her ponytail swinging like an ax, grabs every scene she's in," but wrote that the film "is an assertively, and unapologetically, tidy package, from its use of romance to instill some drama...and the mope-rock tunes that Mr. Reitman needlessly overuses."[136]The Chicago Tribune's Michael Phillips wrote, "Up in the Air is a slickly crafted disappointment. [It] feels tailor-made for George Clooney, who is very good. But the stakes remain frustratingly low and it's one of those contemporary middlebrow projects that asks us to root for a genial, shallow individual as he learns to be a little less the man he was."[137] Julian Sancton of Vanity Fair wrote, "There are two movies in Up in the Air: one about a guy who's flying around the country firing people, and one about a commitment-phobe who's flying away from responsibility and a shot at true love, as embodied by Farmiga. There is no attempt to braid these two threads together, and that's where the movie feels unsatisfying."[138] J. Hoberman of The Village Voice wrote, "Like Juno, Up in the Air conjures a troubling reality and then wishes it away. The filmmakers have peeked into the abyss and averted their eyes...[the film] warns that you can't go home againand then, full of false cheer and false consciousness, pretends you can."[139]Shave Magazine's Jake Tomlinson gave the film four out of five stars and wrote that "There is a very strong sense of humor as well as emotional depth, yet the scope of the film sometimes limits these sentiments. As a moviegoer, this film provides a satisfying experience where one can take a step back to ponder some of the finer points in our daily lives, but don't expect to find all the answers here."[140]Up in the Air earned various awards and nominations, in categories ranging from recognition of the film itself to its screenplay, direction and editing, to the performance of the three primary actorsGeorge Clooney, Vera Farmiga, and Anna Kendrick. The film received six Academy Award nominations and Farmiga and Kendrick both received nominations for Best Supporting Actress, although the film failed to win any of the awards.[141][142] At the 63rd British Academy Film Awards, Up in the Air won one awardBest Adapted Screenplay, awarded to Reitman and Turnerout of the five for which it was nominated.[143] The Dallas-Fort Worth Film Critics Association named Up in the Air Best Picture and awarded Reitman Best Director and Best Screenplay with Turner and Clooney was given the award for Best Actor.[144][145] The film also received five nominations at the 67th Golden Globe Awards, with Reitman and Turner taking the award for Best Screenplay.[146][147] Reitman and Turner also received recognition for the film's screenplay from the Writers Guild of America, where they won the Best Adapted Screenplay award.[148]The film garnered five nominations from the Satellite Awards, with Rolfe Kent, the film's score composer, winning the Best Original Score award.[149] Clooney, Farmiga and Kendrick were each nominated for an award at the 16th Screen Actors Guild Awards, but ultimately lost out.[150][151] Kendrick earned an MTV Movie Award for Best Breakthrough Performance[152] and the Rising Star Award from Palm Springs International Film Festival for her role in the film.[153] Up in the Air won Best Film from eleven awards ceremonies, including the Florida Film Critics Circle, Iowa Film Critics, Southeastern Film Critics, and Vancouver Film Critics Circle.[154][155][156][157] The film earned four nominations for the Best Cast from the Broadcast Film Critics Association,[158] Central Ohio Film Critics,[159][160] Denver Film Critics Society,[161] and the Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association.[162] At the Kansas City Film Critics Circle and the National Board of Review, Up in the Air won each of the awards for which it was nominated.[163][164] Costume Designer Danny Glicker was nominated for his work by the Costume Designers Guild in the Contemporary Film category.[165] In addition, the film was included on lists of the ten best films of 2009 by Roger Ebert, the American Film Institute, and The New York Times.[166][167][168]Daniel DubieckiJeffrey CliffordIvan ReitmanJason ReitmanSheldon TurnerJason ReitmanGeorge ClooneyVera FarmigaAnna KendrickRolfe KentRandall PosterRick ClarkDW StudiosThe Montecito Picture CompanyRickshaw ProductionsSeptember 5, 2009(2009-09-05) (Telluride)December 4, 2009(2009-12-04) (United States)1 Plot2 Cast3 Themes4 Production

4.1 Background
4.2 Casting
4.3 Filming
4.4 Editing
4.5 Music

4.1 Background4.2 Casting4.3 Filming4.4 Editing4.5 Music5 Distribution

5.1 Strategy

5.1.1 September 2009
5.1.2 October 2009
5.1.3 November 2009


5.2 Home media

5.1 Strategy

5.1.1 September 2009
5.1.2 October 2009
5.1.3 November 2009

5.1.1 September 20095.1.2 October 20095.1.3 November 20095.2 Home media6 Reaction

6.1 Box office
6.2 Critical response
6.3 Accolades

6.1 Box office6.2 Critical response6.3 Accolades7 References8 External links4.1 Background4.2 Casting4.3 Filming4.4 Editing4.5 Music5.1 Strategy

5.1.1 September 2009
5.1.2 October 2009
5.1.3 November 2009

5.1.1 September 20095.1.2 October 20095.1.3 November 20095.2 Home media5.1.1 September 20095.1.2 October 20095.1.3 November 20096.1 Box office6.2 Critical response6.3 AccoladesGeorge Clooney as Ryan Bingham, "a suave, smartly dressed businessman in his 40s"[4][5]Vera Farmiga as Alexandra 'Alex' Goran, a "beguiling, mysterious fortysomething"[5]Anna Kendrick as Natalie Keener, an ambitious 23-year-oldJason Bateman as Craig Gregory, owner of Career Transition CounselingAmy Morton as Kara Bingham, Ryan's older sisterMelanie Lynskey as Julie Bingham, Ryan's younger sisterDanny R. McBride as Jim Miller, Julie's fiancZach Galifianakis as Steve, a fired employeeJ. K. Simmons as Bob, a fired employeeSam Elliott as Maynard Finch, Chief PilotTamala Jones as Karen Barnes, a fired employee who commits suicideOfficial websiteUp in the Air at the Internet Movie DatabaseUp in the Air at Virtual History
My Big Fat Greek Wedding is a 2002 Canadian-American romantic comedy film written by and starring Nia Vardalos and directed by Joel Zwick. The film is centered on Fotoula "Toula" Portokalos, a middle class Greek American woman who falls in love with a non-Greek upper middle class "White Anglo-Saxon Protestant" Ian Miller. At the 75th Academy Awards, it was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. A sleeper hit, the film grossed $241.4 million in North America, despite never reaching number one at the box office during its release (the highest-grossing film to accomplish this feat).Fotoula "Toula" Portokalos (Nia Vardalos) is going through an early midlife crisis. At thirty, she is the only woman in her family who has "failed". Her family expects her to "marry a Greek boy, make Greek babies, and feed everyone until the day she dies." Instead, Toula is stuck working in the family business, a restaurant, "Dancing Zorba's". In contrast to her "perfect" sister, Athena (Stavroula Logothetis), Toula is frumpy and cynical. She fears she's doomed to be stuck with her life as it is.At the restaurant, she briefly sees Ian Miller, a handsome school teacher. This event, combined with an argument with her overly-patriotic father, Gus - who merely wants his daughter to marry and settle down rather than pursue a career - motivates her to begin taking computer classes at a local college. She also gets contact lenses, wears her hair curly, and begins to use makeup. Maria, her mother, and her aunt Voula (Andrea Martin) then contrive a way to get Gus to allow her to work at Voula's travel agency.Toula feels much better in her new job, especially when she notices Ian hanging around looking at her through the window. They finally introduce themselves and begin dating. Toula keeps the relationship secret from her family until some weeks later when Gus finds out. He throws a fit because Ian is not Greek and orders Toula to end the relationship, but Ian and Toula continue to see each other against Gus's wishes. Ian proposes marriage to her, she accepts. Gus is hurt and infuriated, feeling his daughter has betrayed him, and Ian agrees to be baptized in the Greek Orthodox Church and speak fluent Greek to be worthy of her family.As the year passes, the wedding planning hits snag after snag as Toula's numerous relatives "helpfully" interfere. Her father insists on inviting the entire church to the ceremony, her mother orders the invitations but misspells Ian's parents' names, and Toula's cousin Nikki (Gia Carides) orders tacky bridesmaids' dresses. Toula is horrified to learn that her parents invited the entire family to what was meant to be a "quiet" dinner, and the Millers, not used to such cultural fervor, are overwhelmed.The wedding day dawns with liveliness and hysteria, but the traditional wedding itself goes without a hitch. Gus gives a speech accepting Ian and the Millers as family and buys the newlyweds a house right next door to him. An epilogue shows the new couple's life six years later in which they have a daughter, Paris, whom they raise in the Greek style, but Toula tells her she can marry anyone she wants when she grows up after she says she wants to go to Brownies instead of Greek school.The film was shot in Toronto and Chicago. Toronto's Ryerson University and Greektown neighborhood feature prominently in the film. Despite its writer being from Winnipeg, and the use of Toronto for location shots, the film was set in Chicago. Walking tours of Greektown on Danforth Avenue point out scene locations. The home used to depict Gus and Maria Portokalos' residence (as well as the home bought next door at the end of the film for Toula and Ian) is located on Glenwood Crescent just off O'Connor Drive in East York. The real home representing the Portokalos' residence actually has most of the external ornamentation that was shown in the film. Also, some minor parts of the movie were shot in Jarvis High School in Toronto.After a February 2002 premiere, it was initially released in the United States on April 19, 2002. That summer it opened in Iceland, Israel, Greece, and Canada. The following fall and winter it opened in Turkey, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Argentina, Australia, Hong Kong, Brazil, Norway, the Netherlands, Czech Republic, Spain, Belgium, Italy, Taiwan, the Philippines, Egypt, Peru, Sweden, Mexico, Hungary, Germany, Austria, Switzerland (German speaking region), France, Poland, Kuwait, Estonia, and Lithuania. It was finally released in South Korea in March 2003, and Japan in July 2003.My Big Fat Greek Wedding became a sleeper hit and grew steadily from its limited release. Despite never hitting the number one spot and being an independent film with a $5 million budget, it ultimately grossed over $368.7 million worldwide, becoming one of the top romantic films of the 21st Century according to Echo Bridge Entertainment.[1] It was the fifth highest-grossing film of 2002 in the United States, with USD$241,438,208, and the highest-grossing romantic comedy in history.[2] Domestically, it is also the highest-grossing film never having been number one on the weekly North American box office charts.[3] The film is among the most profitable of all time, with a 6150% return on an (inflation adjusted) cost of $6 million to produce.[4]Despite being hugely successful for an independent film, according to the studio, the film lost money. Accordingly, the cast (with the exception of Nia Vardalos who had a separate deal) sued the studio for their part of the profits. The original producers of the film have sued Gold Circle Films due to Hollywood accounting practices because the studio has claimed the film lost $20 million.[5]The movie received generally positive reviews. Martin Grove of Hollywood Reporter wrote, "Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson [...] found Wedding when it was a one-woman Nia Vardalos play in L.A. and believed in it so much that they got it made as a movie".[6]Based on 121 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an overall approval rating from critics of 75%, with an average rating of 6.7/10. The website's critical consensus was, "Though it sometimes feels like a television sitcom, My Big Fat Greek Wedding is good-hearted and lovable."[7] By comparison, Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics, calculated an average score of 62, based on 29 reviews, which is considered to be "Generally favorable reviews".[8]The film inspired the brief 2003 TV series My Big Fat Greek Life, with most of the major characters played by the same actors, with the exception of Steven Eckholdt replacing Corbett as the husband. Corbett had already signed on to the TV series Lucky. He was scheduled to appear as the best friend of his replacement's character, but the show was cancelled before he appeared. The show received poor reviews from critics noting the random character entrances and serious plot "adjustments" that did not match the film.The 7 episodes from the series are available on DVD from Sony Pictures Home Entertainment, whose TV studio division produced the show.Throughout the film, Gus continually uses Windex, the popular window cleaner, as a remedy for everything. The film makes references to Zorba the Greek (1964), The Lost Boys (1987), That Thing You Do! (1996), and Meet the Parents (2000), while spoofing Thoroughly Modern Millie (1967). Another independent Canadian feature, Mambo Italiano (2003), referenced Wedding. Because of the surprise success of Wedding and its unusual title, its name was lampooned by several television series and films:April 19, 2002(2002-04-19) (US: Limited)August 2, 2002(2002-08-02) (US: Wide)August 16, 2002(2002-08-16) (Canada)1 Plot2 Cast3 Location and release dates4 Reception and performance5 My Big Fat Greek Life6 Cultural references7 References8 External linksNia Vardalos as Fotoula "Toula" PortokalosJohn Corbett as Ian MillerLainie Kazan as Maria PortokalosMichael Constantine as Kostas "Gus" PortokalosAndrea Martin as Aunt VoulaLouis Mandylor as Nick PortokalosGia Carides as Cousin NikkiJoey Fatone as Cousin AngeloStavroula Logothettis as Athena PortokalosIan Gomez as MikeBruce Gray as Rodney MillerFiona Reid as Harriet MillerJayne Eastwood as Mrs. WhiteArielle Sugarman as Paris MillerAn episode of the 15th season of The Simpsons is titled "My Big Fat Geek Wedding".In 2003, Fox debuted the reality series, My Big Fat Obnoxious Fiance, and, in 2004, the short-lived My Big Fat Obnoxious Boss.Date Movie parodied the film, as did My Big Fat Independent Movie, released the previous year. One The Price Is Right showcase parodied the film.In 2008, TV production firm DCD Media produced My Big Fat Mexican Wedding, a documentary about the marriage of Manuel Uribe, formerly the worlds heaviest man, with his girlfriend Claudia Solis.NDTV (a Southeast Asian Broadcast Channel) runs a series of episodes on lavish weddings, called My Big Fat Indian Wedding.An episode of Ben 10 is titled My Big Fat Alien Wedding.Channel 4 in the UK produced a documentary called My Big Fat Gypsy Wedding about gypsy and traveller weddings, followed by a mini-series called Big Fat Gypsy Weddings.White Wedding is a South African film that follows a similar storyline, where disastrous wedding preparations turn out right in the end.My Big Fat Greek Wedding at the Internet Movie DatabaseMy Big Fat Greek Wedding at AllRoviMy Big Fat Greek Wedding at Box Office MojoMy Big Fat Greek Wedding at Rotten TomatoesMy Big Fat Greek Wedding at Metacritic
The Prestige is a 2006 British-American mystery thriller film written, directed and co-produced by Christopher Nolan, with a screenplay adapted from Christopher Priest's 1995 novel of the same name. The story follows Robert Angier and Alfred Borden, rival stage magicians in London at the end of the 19th century. Obsessed with creating the best stage illusion, they engage in competitive one-upmanship with tragic results.The film features Hugh Jackman as Robert Angier, Christian Bale as Alfred Borden, and David Bowie as Nikola Tesla. It also stars Michael Caine, Scarlett Johansson, Piper Perabo, Rebecca Hall, and Andy Serkis.Priest's epistolary novel was adapted to the screen by Nolan and his brother, Jonathan Nolan, using nonlinear narrative structure. The film was released on October 20, 2006, receiving positive reviews and strong box office results, and Academy Award nominations for Best Cinematography and Best Art Direction.A magician shows a girl a magic trick, making a bird in a cage vanish and then reappear in his hand. Magician Alfred Borden (Christian Bale) is sentenced for the murder of rival Robert Angier (Hugh Jackman). Both were assistants for "Milton the Magician" (Ricky Jay) with ingnieur John Cutter (Michael Caine).Angier's wife Julia (Piper Perabo) drowned performing a water cell act and Angier blames Borden, who professes not to remember if he had tied her with an inappropriate knot. The two become bitter competitors, disrupting each other's acts. Angier's disruption of a bullet catch trick costs Borden two of his fingers. Borden becomes "The Professor" with the enigmatic Bernard Fallon as his ingnieur and marries a woman named Sarah (Rebecca Hall) with whom he has a daughter. Angier becomes "The Great Danton" with the lovely Olivia Wenscombe (Scarlett Johansson) and Cutter assisting.Borden soon begins performing an impressive trick called The Transported Man, where he enters one cabinet and exits another across the stage a moment later. Angier and Cutter argue over how it was done, with Cutter insists that Borden is using a double, an answer Angier refuses to accept. Angier begins performing his own version of the trick using a look-a-like named Root (also Jackman). The act is a hit, but requires Angier to end up below the stage while Root receives the adoration of the crowd.Angier sends Olivia to discover Bordens secret, but she has grown tired of his obsession and betrays him to Borden, who she soon begins an affair with. Olivia delivers an encoded diary of Borden's to Angier which supposedly contains the secret to his trick. Angier and Cutter kidnap Fallon to force Borden to give them the key to the cypher. Upon learning that the key word is "Tesla", Angier travels to Colorado Springs to meet with Nikola Tesla (David Bowie) and enlists the inventor to make a teleportation machine for him. Meanwhile, Borden's marriage has begun to fray due to his obsession with magic and Angier. After an angry confrontation, Sarah hangs herself.Angier finishes deciphering Borden's diary to discover it's a fraud that Borden deliberately had Olivia give him. When a test of the machine appears to fail he angrily accuses Tesla of embezzling his money to pay for other experiments. However, he and Tesla soon discover that the machine works, just not as a teleporter. Instead it creates duplicates at some distance from the machine.Angier returns to London, electrifying audiences with The Real Transported Man, vanishing within the machine and reappearing in the back of the hall. In reality, the machine creates a duplicate. The film doesn't clarify whether the original Angier is teleported or remains in the machine, but the one left in the machine falls through a trap door and plunges into a water cell, drowning. The tanks are disposed of by blind stage hands every night.Borden witnesses Angier drown while snooping backstage and tries to save him but is caught and convicted of murder (in the opening of the film). In prison, Borden is visited by the agent of a Lord Caldlow, who offers to care for Borden's daughter Jess in exchange for Borden's secrets. Borden is given Angier's diary, and finds his conviction has been orchestrated. When Lord Caldlow arrives to collect the secrets, Borden discovers he is actually Angier, somehow still alive. Borden attempts to give them but Caldlow rips them to pieces without reading them, before leaving with Jess. In a final visit, Borden tells Fallon to live for them both, and is hanged.Cutter learns that Caldlow has bought all of Angier's tricks, including the machine, and visits Caldlow's estate to plead for its destruction. He recognises Angier, who admits he has always been Lord Caldlow but pretended to be the American Robert Angier to spare his family the embarrassment of his theatrical career. Cutter realises Borden's death was planned but, unable to have Caldlow come forward, accompanies him to store Tesla's machine beneath his theatre among the tanks previously used for the duplicates.On his way out, Cutter recognises and nods to Fallon as Fallon enters and shoots Caldlow. Fallon's disguise removed, he tells the dying Caldlow that he and Borden were identical twins who shared their lives on stage and off. He removed the ends of his own fingers to duplicate Borden's injury and the two shared lovers to maintain the illusion of being a single man. Fallon reveals they each loved one woman. Borden loved their late wife Sarah and survived, while Fallon loved their mistress Olivia and died. Caldlow reveals his machine's own trick, repeatedly recreating Julia's suffering in order to bask in the admiration of the crowd.Borden leaves Caldlow/Angier to die as a fire consumes the building. The first scene of the film replays, with the magician (now known to be Cutter) vanishing (killing) the bird for the delight of the little girl (Jess). This time, the scene continues and Fallon/Borden appears to reclaim his daughter.[2]Julian Jarrold's and Sam Mendes' producer approached Christopher Priest for an adaptation of his novel The Prestige. Priest was impressed with Nolan's films Following and Memento,[11] and subsequently, producer Valerie Dean brought the book to Nolan's attention.[12] In October 2000, Nolan traveled to the United Kingdom to publicize Memento, as Newmarket Films was having difficulty finding a United States distributor. While in London, Nolan read Priest's book and shared the story with his brother while walking around in Highgate (a location later featured in the scene where Angier ransoms Borden's ingnieur in Highgate Cemetery). The development process for The Prestige began as a reversal of their earlier collaboration: Jonathan Nolan had pitched his initial story for Memento to his brother during a road trip.[13]A year later, the option on the book became available and was purchased by Aaron Ryder of Newmarket Films.[12][13] In late 2001, Nolan became busy with the post-production of Insomnia, and asked his brother Jonathan to help work on the script.[13] The writing process was a long collaboration between the Nolan brothers, occurring intermittently over a period of five years.[14] In the script, the Nolans emphasized the magic of the story through the dramatic narrative, playing down the visual depiction of stage magic. The three-act screenplay was deliberately structured around the three elements of the film's illusion: the pledge, the turn, and the prestige. "It took a long time to figure out how to achieve cinematic versions of the very literary devices that drive the intrigue of the story," Christopher Nolan told Variety: "The shifting points of view, the idea of journals within journals and stories within stories. Finding the cinematic equivalents of those literary devices was very complex."[15] Although the film is thematically faithful to the novel, two major changes were made to the plot structure during the adaptation process: the novel's spiritualism subplot was removed, and the modern-day frame story was replaced with Borden's wait for the gallows in the mise en scene.[12] Priest approved of the adaptation, describing it as "an extraordinary and brilliant script, a fascinating adaptation of my novel."[12]In early 2003, Nolan planned to direct the film before the production of Batman Begins accelerated.[6][17] Following the release of Batman Begins, Nolan started up the project again, negotiating with Bale and Jackman in October 2005.[18] While the screenplay was still being written, production designer Nathan Crowley began the set design process in Nolan's garage, employing a "visual script" consisting of scale models, images, drawings, and notes. Jonathan and Christopher Nolan finished the final shooting draft on January 13, 2006, and began production three days later on January 16. Filming ended on April 9.[19]Crowley and his crew searched Los Angeles for almost seventy locations that resembled fin de sicle London.[16] Jonathan Nolan visited Colorado Springs to research Nikola Tesla and based the electric bulb scene on actual experiments conducted by Tesla.[13] Nathan Crowley helped design the scene for Tesla's invention; It was shot in the parking lot of the Mount Wilson Observatory.[16] Influenced by a "Victorian modernist aesthetic," Crowley chose four locations in the Broadway theater district in downtown Los Angeles for the film's stage magic performances: the Los Angeles Theatre, the Palace Theatre, the Los Angeles Belasco, and the Tower Theatre.[20] Crowley also turned a portion of the Universal back lot into Victorian London.[21]Osgood Castle in Colorado was used as a location.[22]Nolan built only one set for the film, an "under-the-stage section that houses the machinery that makes the larger illusions work,"[23] preferring to simply dress various Los Angeles locations and sound stages to stand in for Colorado and Victorian England.[24] In contrast to most period pieces, Nolan kept up the quick pace of production by shooting with handheld cameras,[24] and refrained from using artificial lighting in some scenes, relying instead on natural light on location.[6] Costume designer Joan Bergin chose attractive, modern Victorian fashions for Scarlett Johansson; cinematographer Wally Pfister captured the mood with soft earth tones as white and black colors provided background contrasts, bringing actors' faces to the foreground.[25]Editing, scoring and mixing finished on September 22, 2006.[19] The song "Analyse" by Radiohead frontman Thom Yorke is played over the credits.[26]The rivalry between Borden and Angier dominates the film. Obsession, secrecy, and sacrifice fuel the battle, as both magicians contribute their fair share to a deadly duel of one-upmanship, with disastrous results. Angier's obsession with beating Borden costs him a great deal of money and Cutter's friendship, while providing him with a collection of his own suicide victims; Borden's obsession with maintaining the secrecy of his twin leads Sarah to question their relationship eventually resulting in her suicide when she suspects the truth. Angier and one of the twins both lose Olivia's love because of their inhumanity. Finally, a Borden is hanged and the last copy of Angier shot. Their struggle is also expressed through class warfare: Borden as The Professor, a working-class magician who gets his hands dirty, versus Angier as The Great Danton, a classy, elitist showman whose accent makes him appear American.[27] Film critic Matt Brunson claimed that a complex theme of duality is exemplified by Angier and Borden, that the film chooses not to depict either magician as good or evil.[28]Angier's theft of Borden's teleportation illusion in the film echoes many real-world examples of stolen tricks among magicians. Outside the film, similar rivalries include magicians John Nevil Maskelyne and Harry Kellar's dispute over a levitation illusion.[29] Gary Westfahl of Locus Online also notes a "new proclivity for mayhem" in the film over the novel, citing the murder/suicide disposition of Angier's duplicates and intensified violent acts of revenge and counter-revenge. This "relates to a more general alteration in the events and tone of the film" rather than significantly changing the underlying themes.[30]Nor is this cutthroat competition limited to prestidigitation: engineering "wizards" Nikola Tesla and Thomas Edison engaged in a rivalry over electrical current, which appears in the film in parallel to Borden and Angier's competition for magical supremacy.[31][32] In the book, Tesla and Edison serve as foils for Borden and Angier, respectively.[33] Historically, Tesla is considered a genius without a sense of pragmatism (like Borden's character), and Edison is viewed as an expert in application and presentation (like Angier).[citation needed]Den Shewman of Creative Screenwriting says the film asks how far one would go to devote oneself to an art. The character of Chung Ling Soo, according to Shewman, is a metaphor for this theme.[12] Film critic Alex Manugian refers to this theme as the "meaning of commitment."[34] For example, Soo's pretense of being slow and feeble misdirects his audience from noticing the physical strength required to perform the goldfish bowl trick, but the cost of maintaining this illusion is the sacrifice of individuality: Soo's true appearance and freedom to act naturally are consciously suppressed in his ceaseless dedication to the art of magic.Nicolas Rapold of Film Comment addresses the points raised by Shewman and Manugian in terms of the film's "refracted take on Romanticism":For Manugian the central theme is "obsession," but he also notes the supporting themes of the "nature of deceit" and "science as magic." Manugian criticizes the Nolans for trying to "ram too many themes into the story."[34]Touchstone opted to move the release date up a week, from the original October 27, to October 20, 2006.[36] The film earned $14,801,808 on opening weekend in the United States, debuting at #1. It grossed $109 million, including $53 million from the United States.[1] The film received nominations for the Academy Award for Best Art Direction and the Academy Award for Best Cinematography,[37] as well as a nomination for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form in 2007.[38] Along with The Illusionist and Scoop (also starring Jackman and Johansson), The Prestige was one of three films in 2006 to explore the world of stage magicians.The Prestige received generally favorable reviews from film critics.[39] Rotten Tomatoes reported that 76% of critics gave the film positive reviews, with an average score of 7.1/10, based upon a sample of 179 reviews.[40] At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the film received an average score of 66, based on 36 reviews.[39] Claudia Puig of USA Today described the film as "one of the most innovative, twisting, turning art films of the past decade."[41] Drew McWeeny gave the film a glowing review, saying it demands repeat viewing,[42] with Peter Travers of Rolling Stone agreeing.[43] Richard Roeper and guest critic A.O. Scott gave the film a "two thumbs up" rating.[44][45] Todd Gilchrist of IGN applauded the performances of Bale and Jackman whilst praising Nolan for making "this complex story as easily understandable and effective as he made the outwardly straightforward comic book adaptation (Batman Begins) dense and sophisticated... any truly great performance is almost as much showmanship as it is actual talent, and Nolan possesses both in spades."[46] CNN.com and Village Voice film critic Tom Charity listed it amongst his best films of 2006.[47] Philip French of The Observer recommended the film, comparing the rivalry between the two main characters to that of Mozart and Salieri in the highly acclaimed Amadeus.[48]On the other hand, Dennis Harvey of Variety criticized the film as gimmicky, though he felt the cast did well in underwritten roles.[49] Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter felt that characters "...are little more than sketches. Remove their obsessions, and the two magicians have little personality."[50] Nonetheless, the two reviewers praised David Bowie as Tesla, as well as the production values and cinematography. On a simpler note, Emanuel Levy has said: "Whether viewers perceive The Prestige as intricately complex or just unnecessarily complicated would depend to a large degree on their willingness to suspend disbelief for two hours." He gave the film a B grade.[51]Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four, describing the revelation at the end a "fundamental flaw" and a "cheat." He wrote, "The pledge of Nolan's The Prestige is that the film, having been metaphorically sawed in two, will be restored; it fails when it cheats, as, for example, if the whole woman produced on the stage were not the same one so unfortunately cut in two."[52] R.J. Carter of The Trades felt, "I love a good science fiction story; just tell me in advance." He gave the film a B-.[53] Christopher Priest, who wrote the novel the film is based on, saw it three times as of January 5, 2007, and his reaction was "'Well, holy shit.' I was thinking, 'God, I like that,' and 'Oh, I wish I'd thought of that.'"[54]English musician and film score composer David Julyan penned the music for The Prestige. Julyan had previously collaborated with director Christopher Nolan on Following, Memento and Insomnia. Like the film, the soundtrack was divided into three sections: the Pledge, the Turn, and the Prestige.[55]All music composed by David Julyan.Some critics were disappointed with the score, acknowledging that while it worked within the context of the film, it was not enjoyable by itself.[56][57] Jonathan Jarry of SoundtrackNet described the score as "merely functional," establishing the atmosphere of dread but never taking over. Although the reviewer was interested with the score's notion, Jarry found the execution was "extremely disappointing."[56]Christopher Coleman of Tracksounds felt that though it was "...a perfectly fitting score," it was completely overwhelmed by the film, and totally unnoticed at times.[57] Christian Clemmensen of Filmtracks recommended the soundtrack for those who enjoyed Julyan's work on the film, and noted that it was not for those who expected "any semblance of intellect or enchantment in the score to match the story of the film." Clemmensen called the score lifeless, "constructed on a bed of simplistic string chords and dull electronic soundscapes."[58]The Region 1 disc is by Buena Vista Home Entertainment, and was released on February 20, 2007, and is available on DVD and BD formats.[59] The Warner Bros. Region 2 DVD was released on March 12, 2007.[60] It is also available in both BD and regionless HD DVD in Europe (before HD DVD was canceled). Special features are minimal, with the documentary Director's Notebook: The Prestige  Five Making-of Featurettes, running roughly twenty minutes combined, an art gallery and the trailer. Nolan did not contribute to a commentary as he felt the film primarily relied on an audience's reaction and did not want to remove the mystery from the story.[61]Aaron RyderEmma ThomasChristopher NolanJonathan NolanChristopher NolanHugh JackmanChristian BaleMichael CaineScarlett JohanssonPiper PeraboAndy SerkisRebecca HallDavid BowieNewmarket FilmsSyncopy FilmsOctober 20, 2006(2006-10-20)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Filming

3.1 Filming4 Themes5 Release

5.1 Critical response
5.2 Music

5.2.1 Track listing


5.3 Home media

5.1 Critical response5.2 Music

5.2.1 Track listing

5.2.1 Track listing5.3 Home media6 References7 External links3.1 Filming5.1 Critical response5.2 Music

5.2.1 Track listing

5.2.1 Track listing5.3 Home media5.2.1 Track listingHugh Jackman plays Robert Angier, The Great Danton, an aristocratic magician. After reading the script, Jackman expressed interest in playing the part. Christopher Nolan discovered Jackman was interested in the script, and after meeting him, saw that Jackman possessed the qualities of stage showmanship that Nolan was looking for in the role of Angier. Nolan explained that Angier had "...a wonderful understanding of the interaction between a performer and a live audience," a quality he believed that Jackman had. Nolan said that, "[Jackman] has the great depth as an actor that hasn't really been explored. People haven't had the chance to really see what he can do as an actor, and this is a character that would let him do that."[3] Jackman based his portrayal of Angier on 1950s-era American magician Channing Pollock.[4]Christian Bale plays Alfred Borden, The Professor, a working-class magician. Christian Bale expressed interest in playing the part, and was cast after Jackman. Although Nolan had previously cast Bale as Batman in Batman Begins, he did not consider Bale for the part of Borden until Bale contacted him about the script. Nolan said that Bale was "exactly right" for the part of Borden, and that it was "unthinkable" for anyone else to play the part.[3] Nolan described Bale as "terrific to work with" who "...takes what he does very, very seriously."[5] Nolan suggested that the actors should not read the book, but Bale ignored his advice.[6]Michael Caine plays John Cutter, the stage engineer (ingenieur)designer of illusionswho works with Angier and Borden. Caine previously collaborated with Nolan and Bale in Batman Begins, where he played Alfred Pennyworth, the Wayne family butler. Nolan said that even though it felt like the character of Cutter was written for Caine, it was not. Nolan noted that the character "...was written before I'd ever met him."[3] Caine describes Cutter as "...a teacher, a father and a guide to Angier." Caine, in trying to create Cutter's nuanced portrait, altered his voice and posture. Nolan later said that "Michael Caines character really becomes something of the heart of the film. He has a wonderful warmth and emotion to him that draws you into the story and allows you to have a point of view on these characters without judging them too harshly."[7]Piper Perabo plays Julia McCullough, Angier's wife.Rebecca Hall plays Sarah Borden, Borden's wife. Hall had to relocate from North London to Los Angeles to shoot the film, though the film itself takes place in London. Hall said that she was "...starstruck just to be involved in [the film]."Scarlett Johansson plays Olivia Wenscombe, Angier's assistant and lover. Nolan said he was "very keen" for Johansson to play the role, and when he met with her to discuss it, "...she just loved the character."[3] Johansson praised Nolan's directing methods, saying that she "loved working with [him]"; he was "incredibly focused and driven and involved, and really involved in the performance in every aspect."[8]David Bowie plays Nikola Tesla, the real-life inventor who creates a teleportation device for Angier. For the role of Nikola Tesla, Nolan wanted someone who was not necessarily a film star, but was "extraordinarily charismatic". Nolan said that, "David Bowie was really the only guy I had in mind to play Tesla, because his function in the story is a small but very important role."[3] Nolan contacted Bowie, who initially turned down the part. A lifelong fan, Nolan flew out to New York to pitch the role to Bowie in person, telling him no one else could possibly play the part;[9] Bowie accepted after a few minutes.[3]Andy Serkis played Mr. Alley, Tesla's assistant. Serkis said that he played his character with the belief that he was "...once a corporation man who got excited by this maverick, Tesla, so jumped ship and went with the maverick." Serkis described his character as a gatekeeper, a conman, and a mirror image of Michael Caines character. Serkis, a big fan of Bowie, said that he was enjoyable to work with, describing him as "...very unassuming, very down to earth... very at ease with himself and funny."[10]Ricky Jay plays Milton the Magician, an older magician Borden and Angier work for at the beginning of the story. Jay and Michael Weber trained Jackman and Bale for their roles with brief instruction in various stage illusions. The magicians gave the actors limited information, allowing them to know enough to pull off a scene.[6]The Prestige at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Prestige at AllRoviThe Prestige at Box Office MojoThe Prestige script at DailyScript.com
This is an episode listing for the comedy drama TV series Ugly Betty. The show premiered on September 28, 2006 on ABC in the United States and ended its run on April 14, 2010 after 85 episodes.NotesNotes Gogona Gareubnidan (2010): Tina Makharadze1 Series overview2 Main series

2.1 Season 1: 200607
2.2 Season 2: 200708
2.3 Season 3: 200809
2.4 Season 4: 200910

2.1 Season 1: 2006072.2 Season 2: 2007082.3 Season 3: 2008092.4 Season 4: 2009103 Mode After Hours episodes

3.1 Season 1
3.2 Season 2
3.3 Season 3

3.1 Season 13.2 Season 23.3 Season 34 References2.1 Season 1: 2006072.2 Season 2: 2007082.3 Season 3: 2008092.4 Season 4: 2009103.1 Season 13.2 Season 23.3 Season 3"Swag" was originally scheduled to be aired as the 4th episode, but was moved to 11th by the network. The change resulted in a number of continuity problems, which were "fixed" by making most of the episode a flashback and adding scenes with Betty telling Christina the bulk of the story. In Italy, Denmark, Spain, India and the Philippines, the episode is retained as the 4th episode.[1]On the season 1 DVD box set, "Swag" is listed as episode 4, without the scenes of Betty talking to Christina in a flashback. Other noticeable changes on the DVD were the reversed order of the show's episode chronology: "The Box and the Bunny", which is the second episode, is listed as the third episode, having swapped places with "Queens for a Day". However, "The Box and the Bunny" should be the second episode.Season 2 was originally slated to have a total of 24 episodes, but due to the Writers Guild of America strike, it had 18 episodes with the last five written and produced following the strike's end.Note: ABC placed Ugly Betty on a temporary hiatus after the March 19, 2009 episode to air Samantha Who? and In the Motherhood in the 8-9PM E/P slot, but returned it after the shows complete their runs.[4] Ugly Betty returned on April 30, 2009 to finish its 3rd season, ending with a 2-hour season finale airing on May 21, 2009.[5]Note: Episodes 6674 all aired on Fridays (October 16  December 11, 2009); Episodes 7585 aired on Wednesdays (January 6, 2010  April 14, 2010).Note: Season 4 was originally slated to have a total of 22 episodes but was reduced to 20 episodes.
Modern Family is an American comedy which debuted on ABC on September 23, 2009. Presented in mockumentary style, the fictional characters frequently talk directly into the camera. It tells of Jay Pritchett, his second wife and step son, and his two children and their families. Lloyd and Levitan conceived the series while sharing stories of their own "modern families."The series premiered to critical acclaim and was watched by 12.6 million viewers.[1][2] Early on, it was named as a key contender for the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards.[3] Soon after, on October 8, 2009, the series was picked up for a full season.[4][5] The series has received positive reviews from critics and received several award nominations. The series has won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series in each of the past three years and the Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series three times so far as well, twice for Eric Stonestreet and once for Ty Burrell, as well as the Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series twice for Julie Bowen.[6][7] It also won the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series Musical or Comedy.[8]The syndication rights to the show have also been sold to USA Network and 10 Fox affiliates for a fall 2013 premiere.[9][10][11] The success of the show has also led it to being the sixteenth-highest revenue-generating show for 2010, earning $1.6 million an episode.[12] Brian Lowry, of Variety, sums up the show in regards to the airing of the pilot episode: "Flitting among three storylines, it's smart, nimble and best of all, funny, while actually making a point about the evolving nature of what constitutes 'family'".[13]As Lloyd and Levitan retold stories about their families, it occurred to them that that could be the basis for a show. They started working on the idea of a family being observed in a mockumentary style show. They later decided it could be a show about three families and their experiences,[14] and originally called My American Family.[15] The creators pitched it to three of the four major networks. (They did not pitch it to Fox because of issues Lloyd had with the network over Back to You.)[16] CBS, not ready to use the single-camera style of filming nor ready to make another large commitment, rejected the series (Welcome to The Captain and Worst Week were single-camera sitcoms that recently aired on CBS but both lasted one season). NBC, already having two shows with a mockumentary format  The Office and Parks and Recreation  decided against accepting the show before the success of the other two series decreased. ABC accepted the series and picked it up for a full season.[16] Modern Family is an adaptation of a French TV show Fais pas ci, fais pas a of which ABC bought the rights in 2008.[17]The series quickly became a priority for the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) after the pilot episode tested high with focus groups, resulting in the network ordering 16 episodes and adding it to the 20092010 fall lineup days ahead of ABC's official schedule announcement.[18][19][20] The series was given a full season pickup on October 8, 2009.[4][5] On January 12, 2010, ABC Entertainment President Stephen McPherson announced that Modern Family had been renewed for a second season.[21] A third season was ordered by ABC on January 10, 2011.[22] The series was also picked up for syndication by USA during the first season for 1.5 million dollars and to 10 Fox affiliates during the second season.[9][10][11][23] The series airs in the United Kingdom and Republic of Ireland on Sky1.[24]Principal photography takes place in Los Angeles.[13] Creators Christopher Lloyd and Steven Levitan, whose credits both include Frasier, Wings, and Just Shoot Me,[15] are executive producers of the series, serving as showrunner and head writer under their Lloyd-Levitan Productions label in affiliation with Twentieth Century Fox Television.[13] The other producers on the writing team are Paul Corrigan, Sameer Gardezi, Joe Lawson, Dan O'Shannon, Brad Walsh, Caroline Williams, Bill Wrubel, Danny Zuker, and Jeff Morton.[13][25] The first team of directors included Jason Winer, Michael Spiller, Randall Einhorn, and Chris Koch. Winer has directed nineteen episodes of the series, making him the most prolific director of the series.[13][26]As a result of the show's success, the cast attempted in the summer of 2012 to renegotiate their existing contracts to obtain higher per-episode fees. However, talks broke down to the point where the first table read for the fourth season had to be postponed. Five of the cast members (Burrell, Bowen, Ferguson, Stonestreet and Vergara) retained the Quinn Emanuel law firm and sued 20th Century Fox Television in Los Angeles County Superior Court on July 24, 2012. While not part of the lawsuit, Ed O'Neill (who had been earning more per episode than the other five) joined his fellow castmates in seeking raises for each to about $200,000 per episode. Their complaint invoked the "seven-year rule" in California Labor Code Section 2855 (the De Havilland Law), and requested a declaration that their contracts were void because as drafted, the contracts were in violation of that rule.[27] Although the lawsuit is still pending, the performers returned for their first table read on July 26, 2012, with the understanding that the producers would resume contract negotiations in good faith.[28]Modern Family employs an ensemble cast. The show revolves around three families that are interrelated through Jay Prichett and his children, Claire and Mitchell. Jay Prichett (Ed O'Neill), the patriarch, is married to a much younger woman, Gloria (Sofa Vergara), a passionate[29] mother, who raises her son, Manny (Rico Rodriguez). Claire (Julie Bowen) is a homemaker mom married to Phil (Ty Burrell), a real estate agent and self-professed "cool dad". They have three children: Haley (Sarah Hyland) the stereotypical teenager,[30] Alex (Ariel Winter), the smart middle child[31] and Luke (Nolan Gould), the offbeat only son.[32] Mitchell (Jesse Tyler Ferguson), a lawyer, and his partner Cameron (Eric Stonestreet) have adopted a Vietnamese baby, Lily (Aubrey Anderson-Emmons). In the first season, the adult cast was paid from a range of $30,000 per episode to about $90,000.[33]The series has also had several recurring characters. Reid Ewing appeared in several episodes as Haley's boyfriend, Dylan.[34] Fred Willard has guest starred as Phil's father, Frank Dunphy, and later went on to be nominated at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series, but lost to Neil Patrick Harris's performance on Glee.[35] Shelley Long has appeared in both seasons as Claire and Mitchell's biological mother and Jay's ex-wife, DeDe Pritchett.[36][37] Nathan Lane appeared twice during the second season as Cameron and Mitchell's flamboyant friend, Pepper Saltzman.[38][39][40]Appearing in a few episodes is Jay and Gloria's dog Stella. Stella was played by Brigitte, but is now being played by Beatrice.[41]The characters in green have regular roles on the show. Dotted lines indicate a parental relationship through adoption or marriage, and dashed lines indicate a divorce between characters.The series premiered Wednesday, September 23, 2009 in the 9:00pm ET timeslot. Soon after, the series was picked up for a full season of 24 episodes on October 8, 2009.[4][5] On January 12, 2010, Modern Family was renewed for a second season by ABC.[42] The second season premiered September 22, 2010, airing in the same timeslot as the previous season.[43] Midway through the second season, the network renewed the series for a third season on January 10, 2011.[22] The third season premiered on September 21, 2011 with two back-to-back episodes,[44] beginning with a one-hour special. On May 10, 2012, Modern Family was renewed for a fourth season by the channel,[45][46] premiering on September 26, 2012.The first season was met with universal critical acclaim. It received a Metacritic score of 86 out of 100.[47] Entertainment Weekly gave it an A-, calling it "immediately recognizable as the best new sitcom of the fall".[48] In Time's review, the show was named "the funniest new family comedy of the year".[49] It has also been compared to the 1970s series Soap, in regards to the multiple family aspect. Some have made comparisons to The Office and Parks and Recreation, due to their mockumentary formats.[50] BuddyTV named the show the second best show in 2009, saying, "Every actor is fantastic, every family is interesting, and unlike many shows, there isn't a weak link".[51] Robert Canning of IGN gave the season a 8.9 saying it was "Great" and called it "Simply put, Modern Family was one of the best new comedies of the season." He also praised the ensemble cast and the characters calling them lovable.[52] According to Metacritic, the first season was the best reviewed new broadcast television series.[53]Modern Family's outstanding cast continues to impress, and even wobbly episodes reliably supply sharp observations and goofball charm.The second season received positive reviews much like the first season, despite being given criticism for a sophomore slump. Robert Bianco of USA Today gave the new season four stars out of four, saying, "Not since Frasier has a sitcom offered such an ideal blend of heart and smarts, or proven itself so effortlessly adept at so many comic variations, from subtle wordplay to big-laugh slapstick to everything in between."[55] Robert Bianco in a later review stated "as good as it was in its first year, is even better in its second" positively comparing the characters to the characters from The Mary Tyler Moore Show, The Cosby Show and Friends.[56] During the second season, Adweek named the show one of the 100 Most Influential TV Shows (98th chronologically).[57][58] Despite this, the season received criticism from some critics for a sophomore slump.[59][60] Eric Stonestreet, who received praise during the first season,[61] was criticized during the second season for being too over the top.[62][63] Alan Sepinwall called Cameron Tucker a "whiny, overly-sensitive diva".[62] On the other hand, Ty Burrell has received praise for his performance as Phil Dunphy through both seasons.[61][64][65]The third season received an overall mixed reception. Slant Magazine reviewer Peter Swanson wrote that while the first episode was "the type of wacky-location stunt that's usually reserved for the fifth or sixth season of a dying sitcom", the following episodes "have been better [...] but they're still uneven".[66] He also criticized the writers for relying too much on "stunt episodes and celebrity cameos, like David Cross".[66] He ultimately gave the season 3 out of 4 stars.[66] James Parker of The Atlantic said, at the beginning of the third season that "Modern Family is very, very funny, almost ruthlessly so ... [It's] a bit of a master class in pace and brevity ... The writing is Vorsprung durch Technik: hectically compressed but dramatically elegant, prodigal in its zingers and snorters but austere in its construction." He found it an exception to his dislike for sitcoms that eschew a laugh track.[67]In The New York Times, Bruce Feiler called attention to how the show depicts the increasing way communications technology shapes the way people perceive others, even family members. "[It] is surely the first family comedy that incorporates its own hashtag of simultaneous self-analysis directly into the storyline," he writes. "Mark Zuckerberg may be a greater influence on Modern Family than Norman Lear."[68]The show's writers and actors agree. "We used to talk about how cellphones killed the sitcom because no one ever goes to anyone's house anymore" for routine information, Abraham Higginbotham told Feiler. "We embrace technology so it's part of the story." Ty Burrell draws on Fran Lebowitz's observation that there is no institution other than media. "I had this little flash of Philand methat we are parsing our personality together externally from how people perceive us."[68]James Parker said that "The American family circa 2011 is, after all, an acutely self-conscious and self-interrogating unit: How does one 'parent'? Who does what, which 'role'? Is Dad sufficiently dad-like and Mom enough of a mom?" he writes. "Modern Family taps right into all this, the cameras that lurch through its three households producing the sensation of a wild and shaky experiment, recorded for purposes educational or scientific."[67]Modern Family drew criticism from the LGBT community for its portrayal of Cameron and Mitchell as not being physically affectionate with each other. The criticism spawned a Facebook campaign to demand Mitchell and Cameron be allowed to kiss. In response to the controversy, producers released a statement that a season two episode would address Mitchell's discomfort with public displays of affection. Executive producer Levitan has said that it was unfortunate that the issue had arisen, since the show's writers had always planned on such a scene "as part of the natural development of the show."[69] The episode "The Kiss" eventually aired with the kiss scene in the background which drew praise from multiple critics.[70][71]During the third season, New York Times columnist Frank Bruni argued that gay criticism of Cameron and Mitchell actually showed the progress gays have made toward social acceptance. "A decade ago," he writes, "[gays] would have balkedand balked loudlyat how frequently Cameron in particular tips into limp-wristed, high-voiced caricature." But now, "most gay people trust that the television audience knows we're a diverse tribe, not easily pigeonholed ... Modern Family endows us with a sort of comic banality. It's an odd kind of progress. But it's progress nonetheless."[72]Another notable criticism of Modern Family from various online news sources is that the show reinforces gender roles and sexist stereotypes. Michelle Haimoff of the Christian Science Monitor criticized the show for only casting the women as stay-at-home moms while the husbands on the show have very successful careers: "There is a difference between quirky, flawed characters and ones who are incapable of professional success. And when the latter is reliably female, it makes for sexist television. It also makes for unrealistic television."[73] Other authors reinforce this criticism by pointing out that stay-at-home mothers are no longer the norm in today's society.[74] According to the Department of Labor, 68.9% of married moms are working or looking for work. Thus, it's no surprise that the lack of representation for working moms sparked conversation on Twitter: "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon writer Ali Waller asked her Twitter followers, If Modern Family is so modern then why dont any of the women have jobs?[75]According to a CNET staffer, commenting on an episode: "The wife and daughter are unable to learn how to use the remote and must be taught by the father, while the son is 'good with electronics,' even though he is thought of as the stupidest member of the family."[76] In the episode "Game Changer," one of the wives on the show, Gloria, hides her skill at chess so that her husband will not be upset at losing: "On its own, this moment is at best a sappy quip about compromise in an often heavy-handed series, and at worst, it's a moment in a show with 9.3 million viewers, on a network owned by Disney, which explicitly validates girls and women subduing their intellect."[77]By contrast, Hanna Rosin has praised the show as one of several that have begun subverting the longtime American sitcom stereotype of bumbling fathers incapable of managing anything at home despite being the only one employed. "Phil Dunphy should be the house boob, with his embarrassing philosophy of 'peerenting,'" she wrote in Slate. "But Dunphy is not just comic relief; he's a successful salesman and the center of joy and fun in his household, especially compared to his uptight wife. No one really disdains him, and the domestic space belongs as much to him as to her."[78]In 2010, Modern Family was nominated with five Television Critics Association Awards. The show gained nominations for best new series, best comedy series and best program of the year, while Ty Burrell and Eric Stonestreet were nominated individually.[79] Like Friends, to reinforce the idea of an ensemble cast, the cast all submitted themselves in the Supporting Actor and Actress categories instead of Lead Actor and Actress for the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards.[80] On August 29, 2010, Modern Family won Outstanding Comedy Series, Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series (for the pilot episode), and Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series (Eric Stonestreet). The show also later received a GLSEN Respect Award for its portrayal of "positive images and storylines that reflect a diverse America, including the depiction of a family headed by a gay couple."[81] In 2010, the cast won a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy, beating the previous year's winner, Glee.[82] On July 14, 2011, the series received 17 Emmy nominations, the third most nominations for the year after Mad Men and Boardwalk Empire.[83] The awards the series was nominated for include Outstanding Comedy Series, Outstanding Supporting Actor for a Comedy Series and Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series.[83] The series has also been put on multiple critics' lists. In 2010, the series was listed on BuddyTV's Top Ten Best Comedy Shows of 20092010,[84] 2nd on Time's Top Ten Best shows of 2009,[85] 2nd on BuddyTV's Top Ten Best Shows of 2009,[86] Jason Hughes Best TV of 2009,[87] 10th on BuddyTV's Top 10 Returning Shows We're Most Excited to Come Back,[88] and on TV Guide's Our Favorite Families[89] Modern Family was awarded a Peabody Award in 2009.[90] In 2012, the show won the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series  Musical or Comedy[8] and was nominated for a British Academy Television Award. In 2012, the show received a total of fourteen Primetime Emmy Award nominations, including Outstanding Comedy Series, and nominations for all six of its adult actors in the Supporting Actor and Actress Comedy categories.Both Ann Romney (wife of US presidential candidate Mitt Romney) in an interview with The Insider and First Lady Michelle Obama in an interview with Kal Penn at the 2012 Democratic National Convention have cited Modern Family as their favorite TV show.Since its premiere, the series has remained popular. In its first season, the show became the sixth highest-rated scripted show in America among adults between the ages of 18 and 49, and the third-highest rated new show.[91] Aided by winning the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series, the show's second season became the highest rated show on Wednesday on premiere week[92] and also rose 34% from the previous season among adults between the ages of 18 and 49.[93] The show frequently ranked as television's top scripted series in adults 1849 as well.[94][95][96] The success of the show has been positively compared to The Cosby Show.[97] During the 20102011 season, Modern Family was the highest rated scripted show in the 1849 demographic, and the third highest rated overall sitcom behind CBS's The Big Bang Theory and Two and a Half Men.[98][99] The season also ranked first among DVR viewers.[100] The third season premiere became ABC's top-rated season premiere in six years.[101] The series success in ratings has also led to the series being credited for reviving sitcoms.[102]Modern Family at TV.com1 Production

1.1 Conception
1.2 Pickup
1.3 Filming
1.4 Litigation

1.1 Conception1.2 Pickup1.3 Filming1.4 Litigation2 Cast and characters

2.1 Family tree

2.1 Family tree3 Episodes4 Reception

4.1 Critical reception

4.1.1 Analysis and commentary
4.1.2 Criticism and controversy


4.2 Accolades
4.3 Ratings

4.1 Critical reception

4.1.1 Analysis and commentary
4.1.2 Criticism and controversy

4.1.1 Analysis and commentary4.1.2 Criticism and controversy4.2 Accolades4.3 Ratings5 References6 External links1.1 Conception1.2 Pickup1.3 Filming1.4 Litigation2.1 Family tree4.1 Critical reception

4.1.1 Analysis and commentary
4.1.2 Criticism and controversy

4.1.1 Analysis and commentary4.1.2 Criticism and controversy4.2 Accolades4.3 Ratings4.1.1 Analysis and commentary4.1.2 Criticism and controversyOfficial websiteModern Family at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe template Tv.com is being considered for deletion.Modern Family at TVGuide.com
The Office is an American comedy television series broadcast by the National Broadcasting Company (NBC). It is an adaptation of the previous BBC series of the same name. The Office was adapted for American audiences by Greg Daniels, a veteran writer for Saturday Night Live, King of the Hill, and The Simpsons. It is co-produced by Daniels' Deedle-Dee Productions, and Shine America, in association with Universal Television. The original executive producers were Daniels, Howard Klein, Ben Silverman, Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant, with numerous others being promoted in later seasons.The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton, Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. To simulate the look of an actual documentary, it is filmed in a single-camera setup, without a studio audience or a laugh track. The show debuted on NBC as a midseason replacement on March 24, 2005,[1] and features Steve Carell, Rainn Wilson, John Krasinski, Jenna Fischer, B. J. Novak and Ed Helms among the main cast. Series star Carell, who portrayed Michael Scott, left the series near the end of the seventh season.[2] Since its debut, the show has aired 184 half-hour episodes and is currently airing its ninth season, which has been confirmed to be the series' last.[3]The Office has received critical acclaim and has been included on several top TV series lists, and has also won several awards including four Primetime Emmy Awards, one of which for Outstanding Comedy Series in 2006. The series initially debuted to low ratings, but during its second season it became the highest-rated scripted series on NBC and was eventually chosen to follow Super Bowl XLIII. Off-network syndication of The Office began in late 2007, notably on TBS and Fox-owned stations in the United States.[4]List of showrunners throughout the series' run:Greg Daniels served as the senior series showrunner for the first four seasons of the series and developed the British series for American television. He then left the position when he co-created the comedy series Parks and Recreation with fellow Office writer Michael Schur and switched his time off between the two series.[5] Paul Lieberstein and Jennifer Celotta were named the series showrunners for the fifth season.[6] Celotta left the series after the sixth season and Lieberstein stayed on as showrunner for the following two seasons. He left the showrunner spot after the eighth season for the potential Dwight Schrute spin-off, The Farm.[7][8] Daniels returned to the showrunner position for the ninth and final season.[9] Other executive producers include cast members B. J. Novak and Mindy Kaling.[10][11] Kaling, Novak, Daniels, Lieberstein and Schur made up the original team of writers.[12] Kaling, Novak and Lieberstein also serve multiple roles on the series, as the play regular characters on the show, as well as write, direct and produce episodes.[13] Credited with twenty-four episodes, Kaling is the most prolific writer on The Office writing staff.[13] Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant, who created the original British series, are credited as executive producers, and wrote the pilot as well as writing the third season episode, "The Convict".[14] Merchant later directed the episode "Customer Survey" while Gervais appeared in the episodes "The Seminar" and "Search Committee".[15][16]Randall Einhorn is the most prolific director of the series, with 15 credited episodes.[13] The series has also had several guest directors, including Lost co-creator J. J. Abrams, Buffy the Vampire Slayer creator Joss Whedon,[17][18] both of whom are fans of the series,[19][20] and filmmakers Harold Ramis, Jason Reitman, and Marc Webb.[13] Several of the writers have also directed episodes, as well actors on the show including Steve Carell, John Krasinski, Rainn Wilson, Ed Helms, and Brian Baumgartner.[13]Before the series aired its second episode, the writers spent time researching in offices.[21] This process was used for Daniels' other series King of the Hill and Parks and Recreation.[21] The pilot is a direct adaptation of the first episode of the British version.[22] Daniels had decided to go this route because "completely starting from scratch would be a very risky thing to do" due to the show being an adaptation.[22] He had briefly considered using the idea for "The Dundies" as the pilot episode.[23] After the writers knew who the cast was, they were allowed to write for the actors which allowed the show to be more original for the following episode, "Diversity Day".[22] Following the mixed reaction towards the first season, the writers attempted to make the series more "optimistic" and make Michael more likable.[24] They also established the supporting characters of the series more, giving them actual personalities and made the lights in the office brighter, which allowed the series to differentiate itself from the British version.[24]A common problem for scripts, according to Novak, is that they tend to run too-long for the regular 22-minute timeslot, leading to several cuts.[25] For example, the script for the episode "Search Committee" was initially 75 pages10 pages too long.[25] A complete script is written for each episode of The Office; however, actors are given opportunities to improvise during the shooting process. Fischer said that "Our shows are 100 percent scripted, They put everything down on paper. But we get to play around a little bit, too. Steve and Rainn are brilliant improvisers."[26] This leads to a large amount of deleted scenes with almost every episode of The Office all of which are considered part of the show's canon and storyline by Daniels.[27] Deleted scenes have sometimes been restored in repeats to make episodes longer or draw people who have seen the episode before back to see the bonus footage. In an experiment, a deleted scene from "The Return" was made available over NBC.com and iTunes; explaining the absence of a character over the next several episodes.[27] Daniels hoped that word of mouth among fans would spread the information, but eventually considered the experiment a failure.[27]The series went through a unique casting process which excluded a script unlike other television series.[28] The producers would ask the actor/actress several questions and they would respond as the character they were auditioning for.[28] NBC programmer Kevin Reilly originally suggested Paul Giamatti to producer Ben Silverman for the role of Michael Scott, but the actor declined. Martin Short, Hank Azaria and Bob Odenkirk were also reported to be interested.[29] In January 2004, Variety reported Steve Carell, of the popular Comedy Central program The Daily Show with Jon Stewart, was in talks to play the role. At the time, he was already committed to another NBC mid-season replacement comedy, Come to Papa,[30] but the series was quickly canceled, leaving him fully committed to The Office. Carell later stated he had only seen about half of the original pilot episode of the British series before he auditioned. He did not continue watching for fear that he would start copying Gervais' characterizations.[31] Rainn Wilson, who was cast as the power-hungry sycophant Dwight Schrute, watched every episode of the series before he auditioned.[32] Wilson had originally auditioned for Michael, a performance he described as a "terrible Ricky Gervais impersonation"; however, the casting directors liked his audition as Dwight much more and hired him for the role.[32]John Krasinski and Jenna Fischer were virtual unknowns before being cast in their respective roles as Jim and Pam, the central love interests. Krasinski had attended school with, and was a friend of B. J. Novak.[33] Krasinski recalled accidentally insulting Greg Daniels while waiting to audition for the series, telling him, "I hope [the show's developers] don't screw this up." Daniels then introduced himself and told Krasinski who he was.[34] Fischer prepared for her audition by looking as boring as possible, creating the original Pam hairstyle.[35] In an interview on NPR's Fresh Air, Fischer recalled the last stages of the audition process for Pam and Jim, with the producers partnering the different potential Pams and Jims (four of each) together to gauge their chemistry. When Fischer finished her scene with Krasinski, he told her that she was his favorite Pam, to which she reciprocated that he was her favorite Jim.[28]The supporting cast includes actors known for their improv work: Angela Kinsey, Kate Flannery, Oscar Nunez, Leslie David Baker, Brian Baumgartner, Melora Hardin, and David Denman.[36] Kinsey had originally auditioned for Pam. The producers thought she was "too feisty" for the character, but they called her back for the part of Angela Martin, which she won.[37] Flannery first auditioned for the part of Jan Levenson-Gould, before landing the role of Meredith Palmer.[38] Baumgartner originally auditioned for Stanley, but was eventually cast as Kevin.[39] Ken Kwapis liked the way Phyllis Smith, a casting associate, read with other actors auditioning so much that he cast her as Phyllis.[40] At the beginning of the third season, Ed Helms and Rashida Jones joined the cast as members of Dunder Mifflin Stamford. While Jones would later leave the cast for a role on Parks and Recreation, in February 2007, NBC announced that Helms was being promoted to a series regular.[41]Four of the show's writers have also stepped in front of the camera. B. J. Novak was cast as reluctant temp Ryan Howard after Daniels saw his stand-up act. Paul Lieberstein was cast as human resources director Toby Flenderson on Novak's suggestion after his cold readings of scripts.[36] Greg Daniels was originally unsure where to use Mindy Kaling on-screen in the series until the opportunity came in the second episode's script, where Michael needed to be slapped by a minority. "Since [that slap], I've been on the show" (as Kelly Kapoor), says Kaling.[40] Michael Schur has also made occasional appearances as Dwight's cousin Mose, and consulting producer Larry Wilmore has played diversity trainer Mr. Brown. Plans were made for Mackenzie Crook, Martin Freeman, and Lucy Davis from the British version of The Office to appear in the third season,[42] but those plans were scrapped due to scheduling conflicts.[43][44]The Office is filmed with a single-camera setup in a cinma vrit style simulating the look of an actual documentary, with no studio audience or laugh track, allowing for its "deadpan" and "absurd" humor to fully come across.[45] The primary vehicle for the show is that a camera crew has decided to film Dunder Mifflin and its employees, seemingly around the clock.[45] The presence of the camera is acknowledged by the characters, especially Michael Scott, who enthusiastically participates in the filming.[46] The characters, especially Jim and Pam, also look towards the camera when Michael creates an awkward situation.[28] The main action of the show is supplemented with talking-head interviews or "confessionals", with the characters speaking one on one with the camera crew about the day's events.[28]In order to get the feel of an actual documentary the producers hired cinematographer Randall Einhorn who is known for directing episodes of Survivor, which allowed the show to have the feel of "rough and jumpy" like an actual documentary.[46] According to producer Michael Schur, the producers to the series would follow the documentary format strictly.[47] The producers would have long discussions over whether a scene could work under the documentary format.[47] For example, in the fourth season episode "Did I Stutter?" a scene would feature Michael going through a long process to go to the bathroom and not pass by Stanley. The producers debated whether that was possible and Einhorn walked through the whole scene in order to see if a camera man could get to all these places in time to shoot the whole scene.[47] Despite the strict nature in the early years of the series, recent seasons seem to have loosened the rules on the format, with the camera crew often going into places actual documentary crews wouldn't, which has also changed the writing and comedy-style of the series.[48] This inconsistency has received criticism from critics and fans.[48][49]The theme song for The Office was written by Jay Ferguson and performed by The Scrantones.[50] It is played over the title sequence, which features scenes of Scranton and various tasks around the office. Some episodes of the series use a shortened version of the theme song. Starting with the fourth season, the theme song is played over the closing credits, which previously rolled in silence. The exteriors of buildings in the title sequence are actual buildings in Scranton, Pennsylvania, and were shot by cast member John Krasinski.[51] The mockumentary format of the show contains no laugh track, and most of the music is diegetic, with songs either sung or played by the characters or heard on radios, computers, or other devices.[52] However, songs have been played during montages or the closing credits, such as "Tiny Dancer" by Elton John ("The Dundies") and "Islands in the Stream" by Kenny Rogers and Dolly Parton ("E-mail Surveillance").[23] Featured music tends to be well known, and often songs reflect the character, such as Michael's attempt to seem hip by using "Mambo No. 5" and later "My Humps" as his cell phone ringtone.[52] Daniels has said that it doesn't count as film score as long as it already appeared in the episode.[23]The Office employs an ensemble cast. Many characters portrayed by The Office cast are based on the British version of the show. While these characters normally have the same attitude and perceptions as their British counterparts, the roles have been redesigned to better fit the American show. The show is known for its generally large cast size, with many of its actors and actresses known particularly for their improvisational work. Steve Carell stars as Michael Scott, Regional Manager of the Dunder Mifflin Scranton Branch. Loosely based on David Brent, Gervais' character in the British version, Scott is a dim-witted and lonely man, who attempts to win friends as the office comedian, usually making himself look bad in the process. Rainn Wilson portrays Dwight Schrute, who, based upon Gareth Keenan, is the Assistant to the Regional Manager, although the character frequently fails to include "to the" in his title.[53] John Krasinski portrays Jim Halpert, a sales representative, assistant manager, and prankster, who is based upon Tim Canterbury, and is in love with Pam Beesly, the receptionist.[54] Pam, played by Jenna Fischer, is based on Dawn Tinsley. She is shy, but in many cases a cohort with Jim in his pranks on Dwight.[55] B. J. Novak portrays Ryan Howard, who for the first two seasons is a temporary worker, but is promoted to sales representative in the third season and later ascends to the position of Vice President, North East Region and Director of New Media until his treachery was exposed for corporate fraud and he was fired, ending up again as the temporary worker at the Scranton branch.[56]The accounting department features Angela Martin, an admitted uptight and often hypocritical Christian who wishes to keep things orderly and make sure situations remain as serious as possible; Kevin Malone, a clueless, overweight man who revels in juvenile humor and frequently indulges himself with gambling and M&Ms; and the patient Oscar Martinez, whose homosexuality and Hispanic heritage made him a favorite target for Michael's unintentional off-color comments. Rounding out the office are the stern salesman Stanley Hudson, who barely stood for Michael's constant references to his Black-American heritage (he also doesn't like to take part in time wasting meetings and sometimes sleeps in them or works on one of his crossword puzzles); eccentric quality assurance representative Creed Bratton; the kind and caring saleswoman Phyllis Lapin-Vance, who marries Bob Vance from Vance Refrigeration across the hall from the office; the bubbly and talkative customer service representative Kelly Kapoor; the promiscuous alcoholic single mother supply relations representative Meredith Palmer; frequent target of Michael's abuse, human resources representative Toby Flenderson; warehouse foreman Darryl Philbin; warehouse dock worker and Pam's ex-fianc Roy Anderson, who was fired in the third season; and Michael's former love interest and former Vice President for Regional Sales for Dunder Mifflin Jan Levenson.At the end of season five, new receptionist Erin Hannon is introduced as Pam's replacement. Gabe Lewis, introduced near the end of season six, is a Sabre employee who is assigned to the Dunder Mifflin Scranton branch as the Regional Director of Sales. A story arc at the start of season five has Holly Flax transferred to the office as Toby's replacement. She acts as a love interest for Michael, as they share very similar personalities. Robert California is the CEO of Sabre, and his first order is to promote Andy to the Scranton managerial post. In season 9 Clark Duke and Jake Lacy joined as two new customer service representatives to attempt to catch up on the ignored customer services complaints that Kelly had dismissed while she worked at Dunder-Mifflin.Initially the actors who portray the other office workers were credited as guest stars before they were named series regulars during the second season.[57] The show's large ensemble has been mainly praised by critics and led to the series winning two Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series.[58] Carell was reportedly paid $175,000 per episode starting with the third season.[59] Krasinski and Fischer were paid around $20,000 for the beginning of the series.[59] Starting with the fourth season, the two started getting paid around $100,000 per episode.[59]A typical episode for a half-hour time slot runs 20-and-a-half minutes.[60] The final episode of season two introduced the first of what would be several super-sized episodes that are approximately 28-minute running time for a 40-minute time slot.[61] Season three introduced the first of occasional hour-long episodes (approximately 42-minute running time; suitable for being shown as two separate normal episodes).[62]The first season consisted of six episodes. The series begins by introducing the office's workers via a tour given by branch manager Michael Scott for both the camera crew and a first-day temp (Ryan Howard).[63] The audience learns salesman Jim Halpert has a crush on receptionist Pam Beesly (who helps him play pranks on co-worker Dwight Schrute), even though she is engaged to Roy (who works in the building's lower-level warehouse). News spreads throughout the office that Dunder Mifflin's corporate headquarters is planning to downsize an entire branch, leading to general anxiety, but Michael chooses to deny or downplay the realities of the situation in order to maintain employee morale.The second season was the series' first full (twenty-two episode) season, and had its first 40-minute "super-sized" episode. Many workers seen in the background of the first season were developed into secondary characters, while the general threat of downsizing continued. Romantic relationships begin to develop between some of the characters. Michael spends the night with his boss Jan, in the wake of the latter's divorce, but does not sleep with her.[64] Dwight and Angela become romantically involved,[65] but keep the relationship a secret from everyone else. Kelly develops a crush on Ryan, and they start dating. When Roy sets a date for his wedding to Pam,[66] Jim grows depressed and considers transferring to the Stamford, Connecticut branch, but tells Pam in the season finale that he loves her, even though Pam still insists she will marry Roy. The two kiss, but Jim transfers to the Stamford branch soon after.[67]The third season consisted of 25 half-hours of material, divided into 17 half-hour episodes, four 40-minute "super-sized" episodes, and two one-hour episodes. Jim briefly transfers to Stamford branch after Pam confirmed her commitment to Roy, before corporate is forced to merge the Stamford branch and staff into the Scranton branch.[68] Included in the transfer to Scranton are Karen Filippelli, with whom Jim has developed a relationship, and the anger-prone Andy Bernard. Pam is newly single after calling off her marriage and relationship to Roy prior to the merger, and Jim's unresolved feelings for her and new relationship with Karen lead to shifting tensions amongst the three. Meanwhile, Michael and Jan's relationship escalates which causes her to behave erratically on the job while Dwight and Angela continue their secret relationship. In the season's finale, Jim, Karen, and Michael interview for a corporate position that turns out to be Jan's, who is fired that day for poor performance. Jim wins and rejects the offer off-screen,[69] opting instead to return to Scranton without Karen and asks Pam out on a date, which she joyfully accepts. In the final scene, we learn Ryan has been awarded Jan's job due to his business school credentials.[70]NBC ordered a full fourth season of 30 half-hour episodes, but ended with only 19 due to a halt in production caused by the 20072008 Writers Guild of America strike.[71][72] The season consisted of 9 half-hour episodes, and 5 hour-long episodes to comprise the 19 total episodes of material created. Karen has left the Scranton branch after her breakup with Jim, and becomes regional manager at the Utica branch.[73] Pam and Jim date happily.[74] An unemployed Jan moves in with Michael, until the dissolution of their relationship midway through the season. After Dwight's crude (though well-intentioned) method of euthanasia of Angela's ailing cat without her permission,[75] she leaves him for Andy, leading Dwight into depression. Ryan, in his new corporate life in New York City, attempts to modernize Dunder Mifflin with a new website for online sales; he also learns that his boss, David Wallace, favors Jim, and thus Ryan attempts to sabotage Jim's career. Ryan is soon arrested and fired for committing fraud related to the website's sales numbers. Toby, embarrassed after accidentally revealing an affection for Pam, announces he is moving to Costa Rica, and is replaced by Holly Flax, who quickly shows fondness towards Michael. Pam decides to follow her artistic interests and attend a three-month graphic design course at the Pratt Institute in New York City. In the season finale Andy proposes to Angela, who reluctantly agrees. Phyllis then catches Dwight and Angela having sex in the office.[76]The fifth season consisted of 28 half-hours of material, divided into 24 half-hour episodes and two hour-long episodes, one of which aired after Super Bowl XLIII.[77] Jim and Pam become engaged, and she ultimately returns from New York to Scranton, where Jim has bought his parents' house for the two of them. Having avoided jail and only been sentenced to community service, Ryan returns to Dunder Mifflin as a temp. Michael initiates a romance with Holly until she is transferred to the Nashua, New Hampshire branch and the relationship ends. When Andy is made aware of Dwight and Angela's continued affair, both men leave her.[78] Newly hired Vice President Charles Miner implements a rigid managerial style over the branch that causes Michael to resign in protest.[79] Michael opens the Michael Scott Paper Company, enticing Pam and Ryan to join as salespeople, and though his business model is ultimately unsustainable, Dunder Mifflin's profits are immediately threatened.[80] In a buyout of the Michael Scott Paper Company, the three are rehired with Pam promoted to sales and Ryan returning as a temp. During the chaos, new receptionist Erin is hired to fill the vacancy originally left by Pam. The season's finale ends with a cliffhanger ending hinting that Pam might be pregnant.[81]The sixth season consisted of 26 half-hours of material, divided into 22 half-hour episodes and two hour-long episodes. Jim and Pam marry and have a baby named Cecelia Marie Halpert.[82] Meanwhile, Andy and Erin develop mutual interest in one another, but find their inherent awkwardness inhibits his attempts to ask her out on a date. Rumors of bankruptcy begin to surround Dunder Mifflin. By Christmas, Wallace announces to the branch that Dunder Mifflin has accepted a buyout from Sabre Corporation, a printer company. While Wallace and other executives are let go, the Scranton office survives due to its relative success within the company. In the season finale, Dwight buys the office park. Michael agrees to make an announcement to the press regarding a case of faulty printers. When Jo Bennet, Sabre CEO, asks how she can repay him, Michael responds that she could bring Holly back to the Scranton branch.[83]The seventh season consisted of 26 half-hours of material, divided into 22 half-hour episodes and two hour-long episodes.[84] This is the final season for Steve Carell, who plays the lead character Michael Scott, as Carell wanted to move on after his contract expired during this season.[2] Beginning with this season, Zach Woods, who portrays Gabe Lewis, was promoted to a series regular.[85] Erin and Gabe have begun a relationship, much to Andy's chagrin, and he attempts to win her affection back. Michael's former girlfriend, Holly returns to Scranton to fill in for Toby who is doing jury duty for the "Scranton Strangler" trial. Michael and Holly eventually restart their relationship. After the two get engaged, he then reveals he will be leaving Scranton to go to Colorado with Holly in order to support her elderly parents. After Michael's replacement (Will Ferrell) is seriously injured, Jo creates a search committee to interview candidates and choose a new manager for the office.The eighth season consisted of twenty-four episodes. James Spader reprises his role as Robert California, the new CEO of Dunder Mifflin/Sabre.[86] Andy is then promoted to Regional Manager and works hard to make a good impression on Robert, and asks Dwight to be his number two.[87] Pam and Jim are expecting their second child, Phillip, at the start of the season, to coincide with Fischer's real life pregnancy.[88] Angela is pregnant with her first son, also named Philip, with Sen. Robert Lipton (although it is implied that Dwight Schrute is actually the child's biological father). Darryl starts falling for new warehouse worker Val.[89] Dwight is tasked with traveling to Tallahassee, Florida in order to assist Sabre Special Projects Manager Nellie Bertram (Catherine Tate) in launching a chain of retail stores, along with Jim, Ryan, Stanley, Erin, and new office temp Cathy Simms. Cathy is also revealed to have ulterior motives for the trip, as she intends to seduce Jim, but fails.[90] Robert later kills the retail store project, and Erin decides to stay in Florida as an elderly woman's live-in helper. Andy goes to Florida and wins back Erin, but this allows Nellie to claim the manager position as her own. Robert tells Andy that he has been demoted back to a salesman, but he refuses to accept the news, which causes him to be fired. Andy becomes motivated to begin a Dunder Mifflin comeback and joins with former CFO, David Wallace, to buy Dunder Mifflin back from Sabre putting Sabre completely out of business and giving Andy the manager position once again.On May 11, 2012, the series was renewed for a ninth season,[91] which will be the final season.[3] Brent Forrester, who has been a consulting producer and writer since the third season, and new series writer Dan Sterling are new executive producers to replace B. J. Novak and Mindy Kaling, who both departed the series after the eighth season.[92] Series developer Greg Daniels returned as showrunner this season.[9] Catherine Tate, who joined the series as a regular in the second half of season eight continued in season 9, and Jake Lacy and Clark Duke joined the main cast.[93] Actor Bryan Cranston will be directing one episode titled "Work Bus".[94] Cast member Zach Woods' contract was not renewed for the season, however Gabe is still expected to return in some form.[95]The Office has had product placement deals with Staples[96] and the Olympic baler,[97] as well as mentioning in dialogue or displaying clear logos for products such as Sandals Resorts, HP, Apple, and Gateway computers, and Activision's Call of Duty video game series. In "The Merger", Kevin Malone uses a Staples-branded shredding machine to shred a Staples-branded CD-R and many other non-paper items, including a salad.[96] As with HP, Cisco Systems, a supplier of networking and telephone equipment, pays for product placement, which can be seen on close-up shots of the Cisco IP Telephones. Some products have additional branding labels attached; this can be clearly seen with the HP photo printer on Toby's desk in season 6, and is less noticeable with the Cisco phones.[98] In "The Secret" Michael takes Jim to Hooters[99] to discuss Jim's feelings for Pam.Many products featured are not part of product placement agreements, but rather inserted by writers as products the characters would use to create realism under the guise of a documentary. Chili's restaurants were used for filming in "The Dundies" and "The Client", as the writers believed they were realistic choices for a company party and business lunch.[100][101][102] Though not an explicit product placement, the producers of the show had to allow Chili's to have final approval of the script before filming, causing a scene of "The Dundies" to be hastily rewritten when the chain objected to the original version.[101] Apple Inc. received over four minutes of publicity for the iPod when it was used as a much-desired gift in "Christmas Party", though the company did not pay for the placement.[103] The travel website TripAdvisor.com was featured during Season 4 when after a visit to Dwight's "agritourism" bed and breakfast, Schrute Farm, Jim and Pam post an online review about their stay. The show reportedly approached the travel review website about using their name on the show and TripAdvisor set up a review page for the fictional B&B which itself received hundreds of reviews.[104] The appearance of Second Life in the episode "Local Ad" was rated eighth in the top ten most effective product placements of 2007.[105] The Office was the only non-reality show to make the list, and Second Life was the only product on the list that did not pay for its placement.[106]"The Office has one of the best casts on television. [...] It also has created several compelling characters and touching relationships, all of which is fairly remarkable for a half hour comedy."Before the show aired, Gervais acknowledged that there were feelings of hesitation from certain viewers.[108] The first season of The Office was met with a mixed response from critics with some of them comparing it to the short-lived NBC series Coupling which was based on a British version.[109][110] The New York Daily News called it "so diluted there's little left but muddy water," and USA Today called it a "passable imitation of a miles-better BBC original."[111] A Guardian Unlimited review panned its lack of originality, stating, "(Steve Carell) just seems to be trying too hard ... Maybe in later episodes when it deviates from Gervais and Merchant's script, he'll come into his own. But right now he's a pale imitation."[112] Tom Shales of the Washington Post said it was "not the mishmash that [Americanized version of Coupling] turned out to be, but again the quality of the original show causes the remake to look dim, like when the copying machine is just about to give out."[110]The second season was better received. James Poniewozik of Time remarked, "Producer Greg Daniels created not a copy but an interpretation that sends up distinctly American work conventions [...] with a tone that's more satiric and less mordant. [...] The new boss is different from the old boss, and that's fine by me."[113] He named it the second best TV show of 2006 after Battlestar Galactica.[113] Entertainment Weekly writer Mark Harris echoed these sentiments a week later, stating, "Thanks to the fearless Steve Carell, an ever-stronger supporting cast, and scripts that spew American corporate absurdist vernacular with perfect pitch, this undervalued remake does the near impossibleit honors Ricky Gervais' original and works on its own terms."[114] The A.V. Club reviewer Nathan Rabin expressed its views on the show's progression: "After a rocky start, The Office improved immeasurably, instantly becoming one of TV's funniest, sharpest shows. The casting of Steve Carell in the Gervais role proved to be a masterstroke. The American Office is that rarest of anomalies: a remake of a classic show that both does right by its source and carves out its own strong identity."[115]The series has been included on several top TV series lists. The show placed #61 on Entertainment Weekly's "New TV Classics" list.[116] Time's James Poniewozik named it the second best TV series of 2006,[113] and the sixth best returning series of 2007, out of ten TV series.[117] He also included it on his "The 100 Best TV Shows of All-TIME" list.[118] The show was also named the best show of 2006 by BuddyTV.[119] Metacritic named it the thirteenth most mentioned series on "Best of Decade" top-ten lists[120] while Paste named it the sixth best sitcom of 2010.[121] The show has some superficial similarities to the comic-strip Dilbert, which also features employees coping with an inept superior. John Spector, CEO of The Conference Board, says that both show the impact a leader can have, for good or bad. Dilbert creator Scott Adams also touts the similarities: "The lesson from The Office and from Dilbert is that people are often dysfunctional, and no amount of training can fix it."[122] A labor-affiliated group praised the episode "Boys and Girls" for what it considered an unusually frank depiction of union busting on American television.[123] The third season of The Office got an 85/100 score on Metacritic,[124] while the sixth season of got a 78/100 score.[125]"'The Office' now is a pale, listless shadow of what it used to be."Recent seasons have been criticized for a dip in quality. The sixth season received criticisms for a lack of stakes for the characters.[127][128] Several critics and fans have also criticized the conclusion to the Jim and Pam romance.[129][130][131] The Office co-creator Ricky Gervais wrote in his blog, referring to "Search Committee" particularly Warren Buffett's guest appearance, "If you're going to jump a shark, jump a big one." and compared the episode to the Chris Martin episode of Gervais's other series, Extras.[14] He later said "I fucking didn't [diss The Office], that's for sure".[14] Many critics have said the series should have ended after the departure of Steve Carell.[132][133] Rainn Wilson felt that the eighth season possessed some mistakes "creatively", such as the chemistry between Spader and Helms, which he called "a bit dark" and argued that the show should have gone for a "brighter and more energized" relationship.[134] Despite this, there are recent episodes that have received critical acclaim, including "Stress Relief", "Niagara", "Garage Sale","Goodbye, Michael", "Tallahassee", and "New Guys". [49][135][136][137][138][139]As of 2012, the series has received 40 Primetime Emmy Awards nominations, with four wins. It has won for Outstanding Comedy Series in season two, Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series (Greg Daniels for "Gay Witch Hunt"), Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series (Jeffrey Blitz for "Stress Relief") and Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing for a Comedy Series. Many cast and crew members have expressed anger that Carell did not receive an Emmy award for his performance in the series.[140][141] Despite this, Carell won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Comedy or Musical in 2006. The series has also been named the best TV series by the American Film Institute in 2006 and 2008[142][143] and won two Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series in 2006 and 2007.[58]Premiering on Thursday, March 24, 2005, after an episode of The Apprentice on NBC, The Office brought in 11.2million viewers in the U.S., winning its time slot.[111] When NBC moved the series to its intended Tuesday night slot, it lost nearly half its audience with only 5.9million viewers.[144] The program averaged 5.4million viewers, ranking it #102 for the 20042005 U.S. television season.[145] "Hot Girl", the first season's finale, rated a 2.2 with a 10 audience measurement share. Episodes were also rerun on CNBC.[146]As the second season started, the success of Carell's hit summer movie The 40-Year-Old Virgin and online sales of episodes at iTunes helped the show.[147] The increase in viewership led NBC to move the series to the "Must See TV" Thursday night in January 2006, where ratings continued to grow. By the 20052006 season, it placed #67 (tied with 20/20). It averaged 8.0million viewers with a 10/10 rating, and was up 80% in viewers from the year before and up 60% in viewers ages 1849.[148] The series has since ranked as NBC's highest rated scripted series.[149] The highest rated episode of the series is "Stress Relief", which received 22.9 million viewers mainly because the episode aired after Super Bowl XLIII.[150] While recent seasons have dropped in the ratings with the eighth season episode, "Tallahassee" ranking as the lowest rated episode of the series, so far,[151] the show is still one of NBC's highest rated shows and currently costs $178,840 per-30 second commercial, the most for any NBC scripted series.[152]The city of Scranton, long known mainly for its industrial past as a coal mining and rail center,[171] has eagerly embraced, and ultimately has been redefined by the show. "We're really hip now," says the mayor's assistant.[51] The Dunder Mifflin logo is on a lamppost banner in front of Scranton City Hall, as well as the pedestrian bridge to the Mall at Steamtown. The Pennsylvania Paper & Supply Company, whose tower is shown in the opening credits, plans to add it to the tower as well.[172] Newspapers in other Northeastern cities have published travel guides to Scranton locations for tourists interested in visiting places mentioned in the show.[171][172][173] Scranton has become identified with the show outside the United States as well. In a 2008 St. Patrick's Day speech in its suburb of Dickson City, former Taoiseach (Irish prime minister) Bertie Ahern identified the city as the home of Dunder Mifflin.[174]The inaugural The Office convention was held downtown in October 2007. Notable landmarks, some of which have been settings for the show, that served as venues include the University of Scranton, the Radisson Lackawanna Station Hotel and the Mall at Steamtown. Cast appearances were made by B.J. Novak, Ed Helms, Oscar Nunez, Angela Kinsey, Brian Baumgartner, Leslie David Baker, Mindy Kaling, Craig Robinson, Melora Hardin, Phyllis Smith, Creed Bratton, Kate Flannery, Bobby Ray Shafer, and Andy Buckley. Writer appearances, besides Novak and Kaling, were made by Greg Daniels, Michael Schur, Jennifer Celotta, Lee Eisenberg, Gene Stupnitsky, Justin Spitzer, Anthony Ferrell, Ryan Koh, Lester Lewis, and Jason Kessler. Not present were writer-actor Paul Lieberstein (who was originally going to make an appearance), Steve Carell, John Krasinski, Rainn Wilson, and Jenna Fischer.[175]On an episode of The Daily Show, Republican presidential candidate John McCain, reportedly a devoted fan of the show, jokingly told Jon Stewart he might take Dwight Schrute as his running mate.[176] Rainn Wilson later accepted on Dwight Schrute's behalf while on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno. After the airing of "Garage Sale", Colorado governor John Hickenlooper issued a press release appointing Michael Scott to the position of Director of Paper Distribution in the Department of Natural Resources.[177]The show is often tributed to by the band Relient K. Band member Matt Thiessen is a fan of The Office, and, during concerts, will often perform a self-described "love song" about the series, titled "The Ballad of Dunder Mifflin", followed by him and the band playing the show's opening theme.[178]Aside from NBC, The Office has gone into off-network syndication in the United States. It has reruns on Fox and TBS. In the United Kingdom, the show was named in listings magazines (but not onscreen) as The Office: An American Workplace when it was originally aired on ITV2.[179] This is done to differentiate this version of the show from the original British series.[179]In Canada, early seasons were simulcast or broadcast earlier than their American debut on Citytv, until simulcast rights were purchased by CH beginning with the third season. The rights were transferred in early 2007 to then-parent network Global, where it quit airing. In late 2007, it started airing on Citytv again.. In Brazil, FX began airing the show on April 9, 2006 at 8:30 pm.[180] In Germany, Super RTL began airing the show on January 5, 2008 at 11:10 pm. In Austria, ORF1 began airing the show on March 6, 2008 at 11:10 pm. In Spain, TNT, Paramount Comedy (Spain) and laSexta are airing the show. In Ireland, 3e broadcast the show with the title The US Office. In the Netherlands, the show began airing on Comedy Central under the title The Office US in April 2007.[181] In India, the show is broadcast on Comedy Central. In Australia, it airs on Foxtel, Network Ten and in 2011 it will also air on Eleven. In France, the show is broadcast late nights on Canal+.[182]Episodes from The Office were among the first shows available for download from the iTunes Store beginning in December 2005. In 2006, ten internet-exclusive webisodes featuring some of the characters on The Office aired on NBC.com. "Producer's Cuts" (containing approximately ten additional minutes of material) of the episodes "Branch Closing" and "The Return" were also made available on NBC.com. The Office also became available for download from Amazon.com's Unbox video downloads in 2006. Sales of new The Office episodes on iTunes ceased in 2007 due to a dispute between NBC and Apple ostensibly over pricing.[183] As of September 9, 2008 The Office was put back on the iTunes Store, and can be bought in HD and Regular format. Netflix also offers the show for online viewing by subscribers, in addition to traditional DVD rental. The Office is also available on Microsofts Zune Marketplace.Of the 12.4 million total viewings of "Fun Run", the fourth season's premiere, 2.7 million, or 22%, were on a computer via online streaming. "The Office," said The New York Times, "is on the leading edge of a sharp shift in entertainment viewing that was thought to be years away: watching television episodes on a computer screen is now a common activity for millions of consumers." It was particularly popular with online viewers, an NBC researcher said, because as an episode-driven sitcom without special effects it was easy to watch on smaller monitors such as those found on laptops and iPods.[184] Between the online viewings and those who use digital video recorders, 25-50% of the show's viewers watch it after its scheduled airtime.[185]The show's Internet success became an issue in the 20072008 Writers Guild of America strike. Daniels and many of the cast members who double as writers posted a video to YouTube shortly after the strike began, pointing out how little, if any, they received in residuals from online and DVD viewing. "You're watching this on the Internet, a thing that pays us zero dollars," Schur said. "We're supposed to get 11 cents for every two trillion downloads." The writers were particularly upset that they weren't compensated for the Daytime Emmy Award winning summer webisodes "The Accountants", which NBC considered promotional material despite the embedded commercials.[186]The show's success has resulted in expansion outside of television. Characters have appeared in promotional materials for NBC, and a licensed video gameThe Officewas released in 2007.[187][188] In 2008 two games were introduced via Pressman Toy Corp: The Office Trivia Board Game and The Office DVD Board Game.[189] In 2009, The Office Clue was released, and The Office Monopoly was released in 2010. Other merchandise, from T-shirts and a bobblehead doll of Dwight Schrute[190] to more office-specific items such as Dunder Mifflin copy paper[191] and parodies of the Successories motivational poster series featuring the cast[192] are available. Dunder Mifflin has two websites,[193] and the cast members maintain blogs both as themselves and in character.Several members of the cast maintained blogs. These include Jenna Fischer, Angela Kinsey, and Brian Baumgartner, who posted regularly during the season.[194] Rainn Wilson wrote in character on "Schrute Space" on NBC.com, which is updated periodically. However, he stopped writing the blog himself.[195] It is unknown whether Creed Bratton authors "Creed Thoughts", the blog attributed to his character.[196]A spin-off to the series was proposed in 2008,[202] with a pilot episode expected to debut as the Super Bowl lead-out program in 2009.[203] However, The Office's creative team instead decided to develop Parks and Recreation as a separate series.[204] In 2009, Greg Daniels revealed that a spin-off series was still a possibility.[205] Paul Lieberstein mentioned that a feature film adaptation of the series is also possible after the series ends its run.[206]On January 25, 2012, news broke that NBC was planning a spin-off series starring Rainn Wilson as Dwight Schrute, that would be set at Schrute Farms, Dwight's bed-and-breakfast and beet farm, titled The Farm.[7][207] The spin-off was created by Wilson and executive producer Paul Lieberstein. Office developer Greg Daniels was not involved.[207] The new series was planned for a premiere in early 2013, which would have caused Wilson to leave The Office.[207] But, in October 2012, NBC passed on the pilot, not going forward with a series. The backdoor pilot episode will air as part of the ninth and final season of The Office in early 2013.[208]The Office at TV.com1 Production

1.1 Crew
1.2 Development and writing
1.3 Casting
1.4 Filming
1.5 Music

1.1 Crew1.2 Development and writing1.3 Casting1.4 Filming1.5 Music2 Characters3 Season synopses

3.1 Season 1
3.2 Season 2
3.3 Season 3
3.4 Season 4
3.5 Season 5
3.6 Season 6
3.7 Season 7
3.8 Season 8
3.9 Season 9

3.1 Season 13.2 Season 23.3 Season 33.4 Season 43.5 Season 53.6 Season 63.7 Season 73.8 Season 83.9 Season 94 Product placement5 Reception

5.1 Critical reviews and commentary
5.2 Awards
5.3 Ratings

5.3.1 Nielsen ratings


5.4 Cultural impact
5.5 International broadcast

5.1 Critical reviews and commentary5.2 Awards5.3 Ratings

5.3.1 Nielsen ratings

5.3.1 Nielsen ratings5.4 Cultural impact5.5 International broadcast6 Other media

6.1 Online releases
6.2 Promotional
6.3 Cast blogs
6.4 Home video releases

6.1 Online releases6.2 Promotional6.3 Cast blogs6.4 Home video releases7 Spin-off and possible feature film

7.1 The Farm

7.1 The Farm8 References9 External links1.1 Crew1.2 Development and writing1.3 Casting1.4 Filming1.5 Music3.1 Season 13.2 Season 23.3 Season 33.4 Season 43.5 Season 53.6 Season 63.7 Season 73.8 Season 83.9 Season 95.1 Critical reviews and commentary5.2 Awards5.3 Ratings

5.3.1 Nielsen ratings

5.3.1 Nielsen ratings5.4 Cultural impact5.5 International broadcast5.3.1 Nielsen ratings6.1 Online releases6.2 Promotional6.3 Cast blogs6.4 Home video releases7.1 The FarmSeason 14: Greg DanielsSeason 56: Paul Lieberstein & Jennifer CelottaSeason 78: Paul LiebersteinSeason 9: Greg DanielsOfficial websiteThe Office at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe template Tv.com is being considered for deletion.Dunder Mifflin Paper Company website
Lost is an American television series that was originally aired on the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) from September 22, 2004 to May 23, 2010, consisting of six seasons. Lost is a drama series containing elements of science fiction and the supernatural that follows the survivors of the crash of a commercial passenger jet flying between Sydney and Los Angeles, on a mysterious tropical island somewhere in the South Pacific Ocean. The story is told in a heavily serialized manner. Episodes typically feature a primary storyline on the island, as well as a secondary storyline from another point in a character's life.Lost was created by Jeffrey Lieber, J. J. Abrams and Damon Lindelof who share story-writing credits for the pilot episode, which Abrams directed. Throughout the show's run, Lindelof and Carlton Cuse served as showrunners and head writers, working together with a large number of other executive producers and writers. Due to its large ensemble cast and the cost of filming primarily on location in Oahu, Hawaii, the series was one of the most expensive on television.[1] The fictional universe and mythology of Lost is expanded upon by a number of related media, most importantly a series of short mini-episodes called Missing Pieces, and a 12-minute epilogue titled "The New Man in Charge."A critically acclaimed and popular success, Lost was consistently ranked by critics on their lists of top ten series of all time.[2] The first season garnered an average of 15.69 million viewers per episode on ABC.[3] During its sixth and final season, the show averaged over 11 million US viewers per episode. Lost was the recipient of hundreds of award nominations throughout its run, and won numerous industry awards, including the Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series in 2005,[4] Best American Import at the British Academy Television Awards in 2005, the Golden Globe Award for Best Drama in 2006 and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Ensemble in a Drama Series.The first season begins with a plane crash that strands the surviving passengers of Oceanic Airlines Flight 815 on what seems to be a deserted tropical island. Their survival is threatened throughout the season by a number of mysterious entities, including polar bears, an unseen creature that roams the jungle (the "Smoke Monster"), and the island's malevolent, and largely unseen, inhabitants known as "the Others". They encounter a French woman named Danielle Rousseau who was shipwrecked on the island 16 years prior to their crash. They also find a mysterious metal hatch buried in the ground. While two characters try to force their way into the hatch, four other survivors attempt to leave the island on a raft that they have constructed. Meanwhile, flashbacks centered on individual survivors detail their lives prior to the plane crash.The second season follows the growing conflict between the survivors and the Others, and continues the theme of the clash between faith and science, while resolving old mysteries and posing new ones. A power struggle between Jack and John over control of the guns and medicine in the hatch develops, resolved in "The Long Con" by the machinations of Sawyer when he gains control of them. New characters are introduced, including the tail-section survivors (the "Tailies") and other island inhabitants. The hatch is revealed to be a research station built by the Dharma Initiative, a scientific research project that was conducting experiments on the island decades earlier. A man named Desmond Hume has been living in the hatch for 3 years, pushing a button every 108 minutes to prevent a catastrophic event from occurring. As the truth about the mysterious Others begins to unfold, one of the crash survivors betrays the other castaways, and the cause of the plane crash is revealed.In the third season, the crash survivors learn more about the Others and their long history on the mysterious island. Desmond and one of the Others join the survivors, while one of their number in turn defects to the Others. A war between the Others and the survivors comes to a head, and the survivors make contact with a rescue team aboard the freighter Kahana.Season four focuses on the survivors dealing with the arrival of people from the freighter, who have been sent to the island not as part of a rescue operation, but for far more nefarious purposes. The survivors begin planning a way to get off the island before the freighter crew can carry out their plan. Flashforwards reveal the identities and future actions of the so-called "Oceanic Six," a group of survivors who have escaped the island and attempted to resume their normal lives. In an attempt to "move the island" to safety, one of the Others uses an ancient device on the island that not only moves the island physically but also moves it to another point in time, while simultaneously teleporting that Other to a desert in Tunisia.The fifth season follows two timelines. The first takes place on the island where the survivors who were left behind erratically jump forward and backward through time until they are finally stranded with the Dharma Initiative in 1974. The second continues the original timeline, which takes place on the mainland after the Oceanic Six escape, and then follows their return to the island on Ajira Airways flight 316 in 2007 (three years after they escaped). Some passengers on the Ajira flight land in 1977 and some remain in 2007. The ones who land in 1977 reunite with the other survivors who have lived for three years with the Dharma Initiative. They then attempt to change past events in order to prevent their Oceanic plane from crashing in the future.In the sixth and final season, the main storyline follows the survivors, reunited in the present day. Following the demise of Jacob, the island's protector, the survivors are up against the Man in Black, known previously as the Smoke Monster. A "flash-sideways" narrative also follows the lives of the main characters in a setting where Oceanic 815 never crashed. In the final episodes, a flashback to the distant past shows the origins of the island's power and of the conflict between Jacob and the Man in Black, who are revealed to be twin brothers. One survivor becomes the successor to Jacob as caretaker of the island, and kills the Man in Black in a final showdown, with the island at stake. A small handful of survivors escape on the Ajira plane. It is implied that a few survivors return home later, while others remain living happily on the island. The series finale reveals that the flash-sideways timeline is actually a form of limbo, where some of the survivors and other characters from the island are reunited after having died because their time on the island had been the most important part of their existence. In the end the survivors are all reunited in a church where they "move on" together.Episodes of Lost include a number of mysterious elements ascribed to science fiction or supernatural phenomena. The creators of the series refer to these elements as composing the mythology of the series, and they formed the basis of fan speculation.[5] The show's mythological elements include a "Monster" that roams the island, a mysterious group of inhabitants the survivors called "The Others," a scientific organization called the Dharma Initiative that placed several research stations on the island, a sequence of numbers that frequently appears in the lives of the characters in the past, present and future, and personal connections (synchronicity) between the characters they are often unaware of.At the heart of the series is a complex and cryptic storyline, which spawned numerous questions and discussions among viewers.[6] Encouraged by Lost's writers and stars, who often interacted with fans online, viewers and TV critics alike took to widespread theorizing in an attempt to unravel the mysteries. Theories mainly concerned the nature of the island, the origins of the "Monster" and the "Others," the meaning of the numbers, and the reasons for both the crash and the survival of some passengers.[6] Several of the more common fan theories were discussed and rejected by the show's creators, the most common being that the survivors of Oceanic flight 815 are dead and in purgatory. Lindelof rejected speculation that spaceships or aliens influenced the events on the island, or that everything seen was a fictional reality taking place in someone's mind. Carlton Cuse dismissed the theory that the island was a reality TV show and the castaways unwitting housemates[7] and Lindelof many times refuted the theory that the "Monster" was a nanobot cloud similar to the one featured in Michael Crichton's novel Prey (which happened to share the protagonist's name, Jack).[8]There are several recurring elements and motifs on Lost, which generally have no direct effect on the story itself, but expand the show's literary and philosophical subtext. These elements include frequent appearances of black and white, which reflect the dualism within characters and situations; as well as rebellion in almost all characters, especially Kate;[9] dysfunctional family situations (especially ones that revolve around the fathers of many characters), as portrayed in the lives of nearly all the main characters;[10] apocalyptic references, including Desmond's pushing the button to forestall the end of the world; coincidence versus fate, revealed most apparently through the juxtaposition of the characters Locke and Mr. Eko; conflict between science and faith, embodied by the leadership tug-of-war between Jack and Locke;[11] and references to numerous works of literature, including mentions and discussions of particular novels.[12] There are also many allusions in characters' names to famous historical thinkers and writers, such as Ben Linus (after chemist Linus Pauling), John Locke (after the philosopher) and his alias Jeremy Bentham (after the philosopher), Danielle Rousseau (after philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau), Desmond David Hume (after philosopher David Hume), Juliet's ex-husband (after philosopher Edmund Burke), Mikhail Bakunin (after the anarchist philosopher), Daniel Faraday (after physicist Michael Faraday), Eloise Hawking (after physicist Stephen Hawking), George Minkowski (after mathematician Hermann Minkowski), Richard Alpert (the birth name of spiritual teacher Ram Dass), Boone Carlyle (after Daniel Boone, American pioneer), Charlotte Staples Lewis (after author Clive Staples Lewis C. S. Lewis).[13]Of the 324 people on board Oceanic Flight 815,[14] there are 70 initial survivors (as well as one dog) spread across the three sections of the plane crash.[15][16][17] Although a large cast made Lost more expensive to produce, the writers benefited from added flexibility in story decisions.[18] According to series executive producer Bryan Burk, "You can have more interactions between characters and create more diverse characters, more back stories, more love triangles."[18]Lost was planned as a multi-cultural show with an international cast. The initial season had 14 regular speaking roles that received star billing. Matthew Fox played the protagonist, a troubled surgeon named Jack Shephard. Evangeline Lilly portrayed fugitive and love interest Kate Austen. Jorge Garcia played Hugo "Hurley" Reyes, an unlucky lottery winner. Josh Holloway played a con man, James "Sawyer" Ford. Ian Somerhalder played Boone Carlyle, chief operating officer of his mother's wedding business. Maggie Grace played his stepsister Shannon Rutherford, a former dance teacher. Harold Perrineau portrayed construction worker and aspiring artist Michael Dawson, while Malcolm David Kelley played his young son, Walt Lloyd. Terry O'Quinn played the mysterious John Locke. Naveen Andrews portrayed former Iraqi Republican Guard Sayid Jarrah. Emilie de Ravin played a young Australian mother-to-be, Claire Littleton. Yunjin Kim played Sun-Hwa Kwon, the daughter of a powerful Korean businessman and mobster, with Daniel Dae Kim as her husband and father's enforcer Jin-Soo Kwon. Dominic Monaghan played English ex-rock star drug addict Charlie Pace.During the first 2 seasons, some characters were written out, while new characters with new stories were added.[19][20] Boone Carlyle was written out near the end of season one,[21] and Kelley became a guest star making occasional appearances throughout season two after Walt is captured by the Others in the season one finale. Shannon's departure eight episodes into season two made way for newcomers Mr. Eko, a Nigerian fake Catholic priest and former criminal played by Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje; Ana Lucia Cortez, an airport security guard and former police officer played by Michelle Rodriguez; and Libby Smith, a purported clinical psychologist portrayed by Cynthia Watros. Ana Lucia and Libby were written out of the series toward the end of season two after being shot by Michael, who then left the island along with his son.[22]In season three, two actors were promoted from recurring to starring roles: Henry Ian Cusick as former Scottish soldier Desmond Hume, and Michael Emerson as the manipulative leader of the Others, Ben Linus. In addition, three new actors joined the regular cast: Elizabeth Mitchell, as fertility doctor and Other Juliet Burke, and Kiele Sanchez and Rodrigo Santoro as background survivor couple Nikki Fernandez and Paulo. Several characters died throughout the season; Eko was written out early on when Akinnuoye-Agbaje did not wish to continue on the show,[23][24] Nikki and Paulo were buried alive mid-season after poor fan response,[25] and Charlie was written out in the third season finale.In season four, Harold Perrineau rejoined the main cast to reprise the role of Michael, now suicidal and on a desperate redemptive journey to atone for his previous crimes.[26] Along with Perrineau, additional new actors Jeremy Davies as Daniel Faraday, a nervous physicist who takes a scientific interest in the island; Ken Leung as Miles Straume, a sarcastic supposed ghost whisperer, and Rebecca Mader as Charlotte Staples Lewis, a hard-headed and determined anthropologist and successful academic joined the cast.[27] Michael was written out in the fourth season finale.[28] Claire, who mysteriously disappears with her dead biological father near the end of the season, did not return as a series regular for the fifth season, but returned for the sixth and final season.[29]In season five, no new characters joined the main cast, however several characters exited the show: Charlotte was written out early in the season in episode five, with Daniel being written out later in the antepenultimate episode. Season six saw several cast changes; Juliet was written out in the season premiere while three previous recurring characters were upgraded to starring status.[30] These included Nestor Carbonell as mysterious, age-less Other Richard Alpert, Jeff Fahey as pilot Frank Lapidus[31] and Zuleikha Robinson as Ajira Airways Flight 316 survivor Ilana Verdansky. Additionally, former cast members Ian Somerhalder, Dominic Monaghan, Rebecca Mader, Jeremy Davies, Elizabeth Mitchell, Maggie Grace,[32] Michelle Rodriguez,[33] Harold Perrineau and Cynthia Watros[34] made return appearances.Numerous supporting characters have been given expansive and recurring appearances in the progressive storyline. Danielle Rousseau (Mira Furlan), a French member of an earlier scientific expedition to the island first encountered as a voice recording in the pilot episode, appears throughout the series; she is searching for her daughter, who later turns up in the form of Alex Rousseau (Tania Raymonde). Cindy (Kimberley Joseph), an Oceanic flight attendant who first appeared in the pilot, survived the crash and subsequently became one of the Others. In the second season, married couple Rose Henderson (L. Scott Caldwell) and Bernard Nadler (Sam Anderson), separated on opposite sides of the island (she with the main characters, he with the tail section survivors) were featured in a flashback episode after being reunited. Corporate magnate Charles Widmore (Alan Dale) has connections to both Ben and Desmond. Desmond is in love with Widmore's daughter Penelope "Penny" Widmore (Sonya Walger). The introduction of the Others featured Tom aka Mr. Friendly (M. C. Gainey) and Ethan Rom (William Mapother) all of whom have been shown in both flashbacks and the ongoing story. Jack's father Christian Shephard (John Terry) has appeared in multiple flashbacks of various characters. In the third season, Naomi Dorrit (Marsha Thomason), parachutes onto the island, the team leader of a group hired by Widmore to find Benjamin Linus. One member of her team includes the ruthless mercenary Martin Keamy (Kevin Durand). In the finale episode "The End," recurring guest stars Sam Anderson, L. Scott Caldwell, Francois Chau, Fionnula Flanagan, Sonya Walger, and John Terry were credited under the "starring" rubric alongside the principal cast. The mysterious, black, smoke cloud-like entity known as "the Monster" appeared in human form during season five and six as a middle-aged man dressed in black robes known as "The Man in Black" played by Titus Welliver, and in season six, it appears in the form of John Locke played by O'Quinn in a dual role. His rival, Jacob, was played by Mark Pellegrino.Lost was produced by ABC Studios, Bad Robot Productions and Grass Skirt Productions. Throughout its run, the executive producers of the series were Damon Lindelof, J.J. Abrams, Bryan Burk, Carlton Cuse, Jack Bender, Jeff Pinkner, Edward Kitsis, Adam Horowitz, Jean Higgins and Elizabeth Sarnoff, with Lindelof and Cuse serving as showrunners.The series was conceived by Lloyd Braun, head of ABC at the time, while he was on vacation in Hawaii during 2003.[35] Braun ordered an initial script from Spelling Television based on his concept of a cross between the novel Lord of the Flies, the movie Cast Away, the television series Gilligan's Island, and the popular reality show Survivor, which began script development for Lost. ABC had also premiered a short-lived series about plane crash survivors in 1969 called The New People with the opening episode by Rod Serling. Gadi Pollack notes that some of "the influences of Lost came from...the game Myst."[36] Though never officially mentioned some striking similarities with the 1976 series The Lost Islands can be found.Jeffrey Lieber was hired and wrote Nowhere, based on his pitch to write the pilot. Unhappy with the result and a subsequent rewrite, Braun contacted J. J. Abrams in January 2004, who had a deal with Touchstone Television (now ABC Studios), and was also the creator of the TV series Alias, to write a new pilot script. Lieber would later receive a story credit for the Lost pilot, and subsequently shared the "created by" credit with Abrams and Lindelof, after a request for arbitration at the Writer's Guild of America.[37]Although initially hesitant, Abrams warmed to the idea on the condition that the series would have a supernatural angle to it, and collaborated with Damon Lindelof to create the series' style and characters.[38] Together, Abrams and Lindelof also created a series "bible," and conceived and detailed the major mythological ideas and plot points for an ideal four to five season run for the show.[39][40] Following the commercial success of the show, the network ABC requested to the pair that the length of the series be extended to include further seasons.[41] Abrams withdrew from production of Lost partway through the first season to direct Mission: Impossible III,[42] leaving Lindelof and new executive producer Carlton Cuse to develop much of the overall mythology of the series themselves.[43] The development of the show was constrained by tight deadlines, as it had been commissioned late in the 2004 season's development cycle. Despite the short schedule, the creative team remained flexible enough to modify or create characters to fit actors they wished to cast.[44]Lost's two-part pilot episode was the most expensive in the network's history, reportedly costing between US$10 and $14million,[45] compared to the average cost of an hour-long pilot in 2005 of $4million.[46] The series debuted on September 22, 2004, becoming one of the biggest critical and commercial successes of the 2004 television season. Along with fellow new series Desperate Housewives and Grey's Anatomy, Lost helped to reverse the flagging fortunes of ABC.[47] Yet, before it had even been aired, Lloyd Braun was fired by executives at ABC's parent company, Disney, partly because of low ratings at the network and also because he had greenlighted such an expensive and risky project.[38] The world premiere of the pilot episode was on July 24, 2004 at Comic-Con International in San Diego.[48]Many of the first season roles were a result of the executive producers' liking of various actors. The main character Jack was originally going to die in the pilot, and the role was planned for Michael Keaton. However, ABC executives were adamant that Jack live.[49] Before it was decided that Jack would live, Kate was to emerge as the leader of the survivors; she was originally conceived as a middle-aged businesswoman whose husband had apparently died in the crash, a role later fulfilled by the recurring character Rose. Dominic Monaghan auditioned for the role of Sawyer, who at the time was supposed to be a slick suit-wearing city con man. The producers enjoyed Monaghan's performance and changed the character of Charlie, originally an over-the-hill former rock star, to fit him. Jorge Garcia also auditioned for Sawyer, and the part of Hurley was written for him. When Josh Holloway auditioned for Sawyer, the producers liked the edge he brought to the character (he reportedly kicked a chair when he forgot his lines and got angry in the audition) and his southern accent, so they changed Sawyer to fit Holloway's acting. Yunjin Kim auditioned for Kate, but the producers wrote the character of Sun for her and the character of Jin, portrayed by Daniel Dae Kim, to be her husband. Sayid, played by Naveen Andrews, was also not in the original script. Locke and Michael were written with their actors in mind. Emilie de Ravin, who plays Claire, was originally cast in what was supposed to be a recurring role.[49] In the second season, Michael Emerson was contracted to play Ben ("Henry Gale") for three episodes. His role was extended to eight episodes because of his acting skills, and eventually for the whole of season three and later seasons.[50]Lost was filmed on Panavision 35 mm cameras almost entirely on the Hawaiian island of Oahu due to the wide range of diverse filming locations available in close range. The original island scenes for the pilot were filmed at Mokul'ia Beach, near the northwest tip of the island. Later beach scenes take place in secluded spots of the famous North Shore. Cave scenes in the first season were filmed on a sound stage built at a Xerox parts warehouse, which had been empty since an employee mass shooting took place there in 1999.[51] The sound-stage and production offices have since moved to the Hawaii Film Office-operated Hawaii Film Studio,[52] where the sets depicting Season 2's "Swan Station" and Season 3's "Hydra Station" interiors were built.[53]Various urban areas in and around Honolulu are used as stand-ins for locations around the world, including California, New York, Iowa, Miami, South Korea, Iraq, Nigeria, United Kingdom, Paris, Thailand, Berlin, Maldives and Australia. For example, scenes set in a Sydney Airport were filmed at the Hawaii Convention Center, while a World War II-era bunker was used as both an Iraqi Republican Guard installation and a Dharma Initiative research station. Scenes set in Germany during the winter were filmed at the Bernice P. Bishop Museum, with crushed ice scattered everywhere to create snow and Russian storeshop and automobile signs on the street. Several scenes in the Season 3 finale, "Through the Looking Glass," were shot in Los Angeles, including a hospital set borrowed from Grey's Anatomy. Two scenes during season four were filmed in London because Alan Dale who portrays Widmore was at the time performing in the musical Spamalot and was unable to travel to Hawaii.[54] Extensive archives of filming locations are tracked at a repository at the Lost Virtual Tour.[55]Along its six years of broadcasting, Lost has developed an extensive collection of promotional tools which are difficult to classify; they range from the traditional promotions of the TV show made by the channel to the creation of alternate reality games, such as the Lost Experience.[56] Lost has shown an innovation in the use of new advertising strategies in the sector and the transformation of the conventional devices used presently. With this aim, the creators of the promotional campaign of Lost have not only understood the importance of the implications of the fandom of the show in advertising actions, but they have also converted the internet in the strategic center from which each and every one of the advertising devices start.[56]Lost features an orchestral score performed by the Hollywood Studio Symphony Orchestra and composed by Michael Giacchino, incorporating many recurring themes for subjects such as events, locations and characters. Giacchino achieved some of the sounds for the score using unusual instruments, such as striking suspended pieces of the plane's fuselage.[57] On March 21, 2006, the record label Varse Sarabande released the original television soundtrack for Lost's first season.[58] The soundtrack included select full-length versions of the most popular themes of the season and the main title, which was composed by series creator J. J. Abrams.[58] Varse Sarabande released a soundtrack featuring music from season 2 of Lost on October 3, 2006.[59] The soundtrack for season 3 was released on May 6, 2008, the soundtrack for season 4 was released on May 11, 2009, the soundtrack for season 5 was released on May 11, 2010 and the soundtrack for the final season was released on September 14, 2010. A final soundtrack, featuring music from series finale, was released on October 11, 2010.The series uses pop culture songs sparingly, and used a mainly orchestral score (consisting usually of divided Strings, Percussion, Harp and 3 Trombones.) When it features pop songs, they often originate from a diegetic source. Examples include the various songs played on Hurley's portable CD player throughout the first season (until its batteries died in the episode "...In Translation," which featured Damien Rice's "Delicate), or the use of the record player in the second season, which included Cass Elliot's "Make Your Own Kind of Music," and Petula Clark's "Downtown" in the second and third season premieres respectively. Two episodes show Charlie on a street corner playing guitar and singing the Oasis song "Wonderwall." In the third season's finale, Jack drives down the street listening to Nirvana's "Scentless Apprentice," right before he arrives to the Hoffs/Drawlar Funeral Parlor, and in the parallel scene in the fourth season's finale he arrives listening to "Gouge Away" by Pixies. The third season also used Three Dog Night's "Shambala" on two occasions in the van. The only two pop songs that have ever been used without an on-screen source (i.e., non-diegetic) are Ann-Margret's "Slowly," in the episode "I Do" and "I Shall Not Walk Alone," written by Ben Harper and covered by The Blind Boys of Alabama in the episode "Confidence Man." Alternate music is used in several international broadcasts. For instance, in the Japanese broadcast of Lost, the theme song used varies by season; season one uses "Here I Am" by Chemistry, season two uses "Losin'" by Yuna Ito, and season three uses "Lonely Girl" by Crystal Kay.Lost originally aired on the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) from September 22, 2004 to May 23, 2010. The pilot episode had 18.6million viewers, easily winning its 9/8 central timeslot, and giving ABC its strongest ratings since 2000 when Who Wants to Be a Millionaire was initially airedbeaten only the following month by the premiere of Desperate Housewives. According to Variety, "ABC sure could use a breakout drama success, as it hasn't had a real hit since The Practice. Lost represents the network's best start for a drama with 18- to 49-year-olds since Once and Again in 1999, and in total viewers since Murder One in 1995."[78]For its first season, Lost averaged 16million viewers, ranking 14th in viewership among prime-time shows, and 15th among the eighteen to forty-nine-year-old demographic.[79] Its second season fared equally well: again, Lost ranked 14th in viewership, with an average of 15.5million viewers. However, it improved its rating with 18- to 49-year-olds, ranking eighth.[80] The second season premiere was even more viewed than the first, pulling in over 23million viewers and setting a series record.[81] The third season premiere brought in 18.8million viewers. The seventh episode of the season, back from a three-month hiatus, saw a drop to 14.5million. Over the course of the spring season, ratings would plunge to as low as 11million viewers before recovering to near 14million for the season finale. The ratings drop was partially explained when Nielsen released DVR ratings, showing Lost as the most recorded series on television. However, despite overall ratings losses, Lost still won its hour in the crucial 1849 demographic and put out the highest 1849 numbers in the 10:00p.m. time slot ahead of any show on any network that season. The fourth season premiere saw an increase from the previous episode to 16.1million viewers,[82] though by the eighth episode, viewers had decreased to a series low of 11.461million.[82] A survey of 20 countries by Informa Telecoms and Media in 2006 concluded that Lost was the second most popular TV show in those countries, after CSI: Miami.[83] The sixth-season premiere was the first to climb in the ratings year-over-year since the second season, drawing 12.1million viewers.[84] Lost was declared the highest rated show for the first ten years of IMDb.com Pro (20022012).[85]Capping its successful first season, Lost won the Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series[86] and J. J. Abrams was awarded an Emmy in September 2005 for his work as the director of "Pilot". Terry O'Quinn and Naveen Andrews were nominated in the Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series category.[4] Lost swept the guild awards in 2005, winning the Writers Guild of America Awards 2005 for Outstanding Achievement in Writing for a Dramatic Television Series,[87] the 2005 Producers Guild Award for Best Production,[88] the 2005 Director's Guild Award for Best Direction of a Dramatic Television Program,[89] and the Screen Actors Guild Awards 2005 for Best Ensemble Cast.It was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Television Drama Series three times (20052007), and it won the award in 2006.[90] In 2006, Matthew Fox and Naveen Andrews received Golden Globe nominations for Best Lead Actor in a Drama Series[90] and Best Supporting Actor[90] respectively, and in 2007, Evangeline Lilly received a nomination for Best Actress in a Television Drama Series.[90] Lost was nominated for the 2005 British Academy of Film and Television Award for Best International.[91] In 2006, Jorge Garcia and Michelle Rodriguez took home ALMA Awards for Best Supporting Actor and Actress, respectively, in a Television Series.[92] It won the Saturn Award for Best Television Series in both 2005 and 2006.[93] In, 2005 Terry O'Quinn won a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor in a television series, and in 2006,[93] Matthew Fox won for Best Lead Actor.[93] Lost won consecutive Television Critics Association Awards for Outstanding Achievement in Drama, for both its first and second seasons.[94] Consecutively as well, it won in 2005 and 2006 the Visual Effects Society Award for Outstanding Supporting Visual Effects in a Broadcast Program.[95][96] Malcolm David Kelley won a Young Artist Award for his performance as Walt in 2006.[97]In 2005, Lost was voted Entertainment Weekly's Entertainer of the Year. The show won a 2005 Prism Award for Charlie's drug storyline in the episodes "Pilot," "House of the Rising Sun," and "The Moth".[98] In 2007 Lost was listed as one of Time magazine's "100 Best TV Shows of All-TIME."[99] The series was nominated for but did not win a Writer's Guild Award and Producer's Guild Award again in 2007.[100] In June 2007, Lost beat out over 20 nominated television shows from countries all over the globe to win the Best Drama award at the Monte Carlo Television Festival. In September 2007 both Michael Emerson and Terry O'Quinn were nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series, the award going to O'Quinn.[101] Lost was again nominated for Outstanding Drama Series at the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards in 2008. The show also garnered seven other Emmy nominations, including Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for Michael Emerson.[4] In 2009, Lost was again nominated for Outstanding Drama Series, as well Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for Michael Emerson at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards, of which the latter won.[4]In 2010, the sixth and final season was nominated for twelve Emmy Awards at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards including Outstanding Drama Series, Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series for Carlton Cuse and Damon Lindelof for the show's series finale, "The End," Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series for Matthew Fox, Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for Michael Emerson and Terry O'Quinn and Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series for Elizabeth Mitchell, it won only one Emmy (Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing) out of its twelve nominations for a series total of 11 wins and 55 nominations in its six year run.[102]Lost has been described by many critics as one of the greatest television series of all time.[99][103][104] Bill Carter, television reporter of The New York Times, defined Lost as "the show with perhaps the most compelling continuing story line in television history."[105] Entertainment Weekly put the show on its end-of-the-decade, "best-of" list, saying, "Plane crash. Smoke monster. Polar bear. Crazy French lady. The Others. The hatch. The Dharma Initiative. Time-travel flashes. Name another network drama that can so wondrously turn a? into a!"[106] In 2012, Entertainment Weekly also listed the show at #10 in the "25 Best Cult TV Shows from the Past 25 Years," with a hot-and-cold description:The first season received critical acclaim. USA Today said it was a "totally original, fabulously enjoyable lost-at-sea series, Lost had taken "an outlandish Saturday-serial setup and imbued it with real characters and honest emotions, without sacrificing any of the old-fashioned fun."[108] The Los Angeles Times praised the production values and said it "knows the buttons it wants to push (fear of flying, fear of abandonment, fear of the unknown) and pushes them, repeatedly, like a kid playing a video game."[109] IGN noted that the first season "succeeded first and foremost in character development."[110] Lost season one was ranked number one in the "Best of 2005 TV Coverage: Critic Top Ten Lists" by Matthew Gilbert of The Boston Globe, Tom Gliatto of People Weekly, Charlie McCollum of the San Jose Mercury News and Robert Bianco of USA Today.[111]The second season received favorable reviews, but it was noted that the season "stumbled with some storylines going nowhere and some characters underutilized." IGN also noted the addition of Desmond Hume as a standout new character.[112] The San Francisco Chronicle called Season 2 an "extended, mostly unsatisfying foray into deeper mythology with very little payoff."[113] After winning "Best Drama Series" for season one, Lost was snubbed by the Emmy Awards in Season 2. Nearing the end of the second season, USA Today listed the most popular fan theories during Season 2  the island as a psychological experiment, that the hatch had electromagnetic properties, string theory of time, and that everyone on the island had developed a "collective consciousness" that allowed them to appear in each other's past. One fan interview by USA Today said that "Real suspense comes from answers, not questions. Suspense comes not from wondering what's going on but from wondering what happens next. If you withhold answers, it becomes impossible to satisfy."[114]The first block of episodes of the third season was criticized for raising too many mysteries[115] and not providing enough answers.[116] Complaints were also made about the limited screen-time for many of the main characters in the first block.[117] Locke, played by Terry O'Quinn, who had tied for the highest second season episode count, appeared in only 13 of 22 episodes in the third seasononly two more than guest star M.C. Gainey, who played Tom. Reaction to two new characters, Nikki and Paulo, was generally negative, with Lindelof even acknowledging that the couple was "universally despised" by fans.[118] The decision to split the season and the American timeslot switch after the hiatus were also criticized.[119][120] Cuse acknowledged that, "No one was happy with the six-episode run."[121] The second block of episodes was critically acclaimed however,[122] with the crew dealing with problems from the first block.[123] More answers were written into the show,[124] and Nikki and Paulo were killed off.[125] It was also announced that the series would end three seasons after the third season,[126] which Cuse hoped would tell the audience that the writers knew where the story was going.[127]The fourth season opened to critical acclaim not seen since the first season. Metacritic gave season four a weighted average of 87 based on the impressions of a select twelve critical reviews,[128] earning the second highest Metascore in the 20072008 television season after the fifth and final season of HBO's The Wire.[129] For the first time since season one, Lost received an Emmy nomination for 'Outstanding Drama Series'. Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle said that the Season 4 episodes were "roller coasters of fast action and revelation" and that series was "back on track".[113] In a survey conducted by TVWeek of professional critics, Lost was voted the best show on television in the first half of 2008 "by a wide margin," apparently "crack[ing] the top five on nearly every critic's submission" and receiving "nothing but praise."[2] The New York Times said the show reveled in critiques of capitalism, using the fictional Mittelos Bioscience and the "malevolent British industrialist" character of Charles Widmore as examples. The critic also said that the show "in the dark business of exploring just how futile the modern search for peace, knowledge, recovery or profit really is." The critic did go on to say that series was not as "philosophically refined" as The Sopranos or The Wire but that it "has maximized the potential of narrative uncertainty and made it a beguiling constant".[130]The fifth season once again received mostly positive critical reception. Season 5 was given a weighted average of 78 out of 100 by Metacritic. Variety said that "The ABC series remains one of primetime's most uncompromising efforts, and this year's latest wrinkle on flashbacks, flash-forwards and island-disappearing flashes of light does nothing to alter that perception."[131] Alan Sepinwall of The Newark Star Ledger said that Season May 5, finally be "a day of reckoning between those viewers who embrace the show's science-fiction trappings, and those who prefer not to think about them." Sepinwall also related that "I loved every minute. But I'm also a geek who read Ray Bradbury and Isaac Asimov growing up."[132] Heather Havrilesky of Salon.com criticized the use of time travel saying that "when a narrator brings magic or time travel or an act of God into the picture, then uses it without restraint, the story loses its anchor to real life." The critic also asked "Why does it matter what Locke and Richard Alpert and Daniel Faraday or anyone else does, when they all seem as clueless and unfettered from reality as we are as viewers? How can these characters have any concrete agenda or strategic approach or philosophical perspective on anything when the rug is pulled out from under them by another Act of God every few seconds?"[133] The New York Times also commented that "what has been most dispiriting about the current season is the show's willingness to abandon many of the larger and more compelling themes that grounded the elaborate plot: the struggles between faith and reason; the indictments of extreme capitalism, the futility of recovery. All that remains is the reductively limned battle between fate and free will largely playing out, now, in Jack Shephard's belief that returning to the island is his Destiny."[134] The A.V. Club said of the fifth season finale, "Me? I found the ending frustrating, but in a good way. This finale was entertaining as all get-out to me, and despite the occasional groaner moment, I think this may be Lost's most purposeful, surprising finale."[135]Season Six opened to much hype and curiosity. The A.V. Club asked, "I'm guessing that one of the biggest fears of Lost fans as we ride out this sixth and final seasonbumps and allis that we're going to come to the end and find a big nothing in return for all we've invested in these characters. We don't just need answers, we need justifications. Why has whatever happened, happened? Who has called this particular meeting to order, and does it really matter who showed up?"[136] The episodes "Dr. Linus", "Ab Aeterno", "Happily Ever After", and "The Candidate" opened to highly positive critical reception while the third-to-last episode "Across the Sea" was the episode with the most negative reception.[137] The time spent at the Other's temple was criticized.[138] E! Online described the show as "lightning in a bottle" and picked it as "Top TV Drama of 2010."[139]The series finale opened to highly polarized critical and fan reception. According to the web site Metacritic, "The End" received "generally favorable reviews" with a Metascore  a weighted average based on the impressions of 31 critical reviews  of 74 out of 100.[137] IGN reviewer Chris Carbot gave the finale a 10/10, tying it with the initial review of "Pilot, Part 1", "Through the Looking Glass", "The Constant" and "There's No Place Like Home, Parts 2 & 3" as the best reviewed episode of Lost. He described it as "one of the most enthralling, entertaining and satisfying conclusions I could have hoped for." Carbot also noted that the discussions about the episode may never end, saying "Lost may be gone, but it will hardly be forgotten."[140] Eric Deggans of the St. Petersburg Times also gave the finale a perfect score, stating "Sunday's show was an emotional, funny, expertly measured reminder of what Lost has really centered on since its first moments on the prime time TV landscape: faith, hope, romance and the power of redemption through belief in the best of what moves mankind."[141] Robert Bianco of USA Today rated the episode perfect as well, deeming the finale "can stand with the best any series has produced".[142] Hal Boedeker of Orlando Sentinel cited the finale being "a stunner."[143]British newspapers The Guardian and The Daily Telegraph both reported that "The End" had received negative reviews and disappointed its viewers. Alan Sepinwall of Star-Ledger was less enthusiastic of the finale, stating "I'm still wrestling with my feelings about 'The End'... I thought most of it worked like gangbusters. ... But as someone who did spend at least part of the last six years dwelling on the questions that were unanswered  be they little things like the outrigger shootout or why The Others left Dharma in charge of the Swan station after the purge, or bigger ones like Walt  I can't say I found 'The End' wholly satisfying, either as closure for this season or the series. ... There are narrative dead ends in every season of 'Lost,' but it felt like season six had more than usual."[144] Mike Hale of The New York Times gave "The End" a mixed review, as the episode showed that the series was "shaky on the big picture  on organizing the welter of mythic-religious-philosophical material it insisted on incorporating into its plot  but highly skilled at the small one, the moment to moment business of telling an exciting story. Rendered insignificant ... were the particulars of what they had done on the island."[145] David Zurawik of the Baltimore Sun gave the episode a highly negative review, writing "If this is supposed to be such a smart and wise show, unlike anything else on network TV (blah, blah, blah), why such a wimpy, phony, quasi-religious, white-light, huggy-bear ending. ... Once Jack stepped into the church it looked like he was walking into a Hollywood wrap party without food or music  just a bunch of actors grinning idiotically for 10 minutes and hugging one another."[146]As a mainstream cult television show, Lost has generated a dedicated and thriving international fan community. Lost fans, sometimes dubbed Lostaways[147] or Losties,[148] have gathered at Comic-Con International and conventions organized by ABC,[148][149] but have also been active in developing a large number of fan websites, including Lostpedia, and forums dedicated to the program and its related incarnations. Because of the show's elaborate mythology, its fansites have focused on speculation and theorizing about the island's mysteries, as well as on more typical fan activities such as producing fan fiction and videos, compiling episode transcripts, shipping characters, and collecting memorabilia.[150][151][152]Anticipating fan interest and trying to keep its audience engrossed, ABC embarked on various cross-media endeavors, often using new media. Fans of Lost have been able to explore ABC-produced tie-in websites, tie-in novels, an official forum sponsored by the creative team behind Lost ("The Fuselage"), "mobisodes," podcasts by the producers, an official magazine, and an alternate reality game (ARG) "The Lost Experience."[153] An official fanclub was launched in the summer of 2005 through Creation Entertainment.[148]Due to the show's popularity, references to it and elements from its story have appeared in parody and popular culture usage. These include appearances on television, such as on the series Will & Grace, Curb Your Enthusiasm, 30 Rock,[154] Scrubs, The Office, Family Guy, American Dad!, The Simpsons and The Venture Bros..[155] Lost is also featured as an Easter egg in several video games, including Dead Island, Half-Life 2: Episode Two, Fallout 3, Uncharted 2: Among Thieves, World of Warcraft, Just Cause 2, Batman: Arkham City, and Singularity.[156] Similarly, several songs have been published whose themes and titles were derived from the series, such as Moneen ("Don't Ever Tell Locke What He Can't Do"), Veil of Maya ("Namaste"), Cosmo Jarvis ("Lost"), Senses Fail ("Lost and Found" and "All the Best Cowboys Have Daddy Issues"), Gatsbys American Dream ("You All Everybody" and "Station 5: The Pearl"), and Punchline ("Roller Coaster Smoke"). Weezer named their eighth studio album Hurley after the character, with a photo of actor Jorge Garcia on the cover.[157]After the episode "Numbers" aired on March 2, 2005, numerous people used the eponymous figures (4, 8, 15, 16, 23 and 42) as lottery entries. According to the Pittsburgh Tribune-Review, within three days, the numbers were tried over 500 times by local players.[158] By October 2005, thousands had tried them for the multi-state Powerball lottery.[159] A study of the Quebec Lottery showed that the sequence was the third most popular choice of numbers for lottery players, behind only the arithmetic sequences 123456 and 71421283542.[160] The issue came to attention after a Mega Millions drawing for a near-record US$380,000,000 jackpot on January 4, 2011 drew a series of numbers in which the three lowest numbers (4815) and the mega ball (42) matched four of the six numbers. The No. 42 is also the "Mega Number" in Hurley's "Mega Lotto" ticket. The players who played the combination won $150 each (or $118 in California).[161]In addition to traditional terrestrial and satellite broadcasting, Lost is available from various online services, including Amazon Instant Video,[162] Hulu,[163] and Netflix.[164] It was one of the first series issued through Apple's iTunes Store beginning in October 2005.[165] On August 29, 2007, Lost became one of the first TV programs available for download in the UK iTunes Store.[166]In April 2006, Disney announced that Lost would be available for free online in streaming format, with advertising, on ABC's website, as part of a two-month experiment of future distribution strategies. The trial, which ran from May to June 2006, caused a stir among network affiliates who were afraid of being cut out of advertising revenue. The streaming of Lost episodes direct from ABC's website was only available to viewers in the United States due to international licensing agreements.[167][168] In 2009, Lost was named the most watched show on the Internet based on viewers of episodes on ABC's website. The Nielsen Company reported that 1.425million unique viewers have watched at least one episode on ABC's website.[169]The first season of Lost was released under the title Lost: The Complete First Season as a widescreen seven-disc Region 1 DVD box set on September 6, 2005, two weeks before the premiere of the second season. It was distributed by Buena Vista Home Entertainment. In addition to all the episodes that had been aired, it included several DVD extras such as episode commentaries, behind-the-scenes footage and making-of features as well as deleted scenes, deleted flashback scenarios and a blooper reel. The same set was released on November 30, 2005 in Region 4,[170] The season was first released split into two parts: the first twelve episodes of season 1 were available as a wide screen four-disc Region 2 DVD box set on October 31, 2005, while the remaining thirteen episodes of season 1 were released on January 16, 2006.[171] The DVD features available on the Region 1 release were likewise split over the two box sets. The first two seasons were released separately on Blu-ray Disc on June 16, 2009.[172]The second season was released under the title Lost: The Complete Second Season  The Extended Experience as a wide screen seven-disc Region 1 DVD box set on September 5, 2006. The sets include several DVD extras, including behind the scenes footage, deleted scenes and a "Lost Connections" chart, which shows how all of the characters on the island are inter-connected.[173] Again, the season was initially delivered in two sets for Region 2: the first twelve episodes were released as a widescreen four-disc DVD box set on July 17, 2006, while the remaining episodes of season 2 were released as a four-disc DVD box set on October 2, 2006.[174] The set was released in Region 4 on October 4, 2006.The third season was released under the title Lost: The Complete Third Season  The Unexplored Experience on DVD and Blu-ray in Region 1 on December 11, 2007.[175] As with seasons 1 and 2, the third season release includes audio commentaries with the cast and crew, bonus featurettes, deleted scenes, and bloopers. The third season was released in Region 2 solely on DVD on October 22, 2007, though this time only as a complete set, unlike previous seasons.[176]The fourth season was released as Lost: The Complete Fourth Season  The Expanded Experience in Region 1 on December 9, 2008 on both DVD and Blu-ray Disc.[177] It was released on DVD in Region 2 on October 20, 2008.[178] The set includes audio commentaries, deleted scenes, bloopers and bonus featurettes.The first three seasons of Lost have sold successfully on DVD. The Season 1 boxset entered the DVD sales chart at number two in September 2005,[179] and the Season 2 boxset entered the DVD sales chart at the number one position in its first week of release in September 2006, believed to be the second TV-DVD ever to enter the chart at the top spot.[180] The Season 3 boxset sold over 1,000,000 copies in three weeks.[181]Both the Season 6 boxset and the complete series collection contained a 12minute epilogue-like bonus feature called "The New Man in Charge."[182][183] The Season 6 DVD set entered the DVD sales chart at the number one position in its first week of release in September 2010 boasting strong sales in the DVD and Blu-ray format for the regular season set as well as for the series box set.[184]The characters and setting of Lost have appeared in several official tie-ins outside of the television broadcast, including in print, on the Internet, and in short videos for mobile phones. Three novelizations have been released by Hyperion Books, a publisher owned by Disney, ABC's parent company. They are Endangered Species (ISBN 0-7868-9090-8) and Secret Identity (ISBN 0-7868-9091-6) both by Cathy Hapka and Signs of Life (ISBN 0-7868-9092-4) by Frank Thompson. Additionally, Hyperion published a metafictional book titled Bad Twin (ISBN 1-4013-0276-9), written by Laurence Shames,[185] and credited to fictitious author "Gary Troup," who ABC's marketing department claimed was a passenger on Oceanic Flight 815.Several unofficial books relating to the show have also been published. Finding Lost: The Unofficial Guide (ISBN 1-55022-743-2) by Nikki Stafford and published by ECW Press is a book detailing the show for fans and those new to the show. What Can Be Found in Lost? (ISBN 0-7369-2121-4) by John Ankerberg and Dillon Burrough, published by Harvest House is the first book dedicated to an investigation of the spiritual themes of the series from a Christian perspective. Living Lost: Why We're All Stuck on the Island (ISBN 1-891053-02-7) by J. Wood,[186] published by the Garett County Press, is the first work of cultural criticism based on the series. The book explores the show's strange engagement with the contemporary experiences of war, (mis)information, and terrorism, and argues that the audience functions as a character in the narrative. The author also writes a blog column[187] during the second part of the third season for Powell's Books. Each post discusses the previous episode's literary, historical, philosophical and narrative connections.The show's networks and producers have made extensive use of the Internet in expanding the background of the story. For example, during the first season, a fictional diary by an unseen survivor called "Janelle Granger" was presented on the ABC web site for the series. Likewise, a tie-in website about the fictional Oceanic Airlines appeared during the first season, which included several Easter eggs and clues about the show. Another tie-in website was launched after the airing of "Orientation" about the Hanso Foundation. In the UK, the interactive back-stories of several characters were included in "Lost Untold," a section of Channel 4's Lost website. Similarly, beginning in November 2005, ABC produced an official podcast, hosted by series writers and executive producers Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse. The podcast typically features a discussion about the weekly episode, interviews with cast members and questions from viewers.[188] Sky1 also hosted a podcast presented by Iain Lee on their website, which analyzed each episode after it aired in the United Kingdom.[189]The foray into the online realm culminated in the Lost Experience, an Internet-based alternate reality game produced by Channel 7 (Australia), ABC (America) and Channel Four (UK), which began in early May 2006. The game presents a five-phase parallel storyline, primarily involving the Hanso Foundation.[190]Short mini-episodes ("mobisodes") called the Lost Video Diaries were originally scheduled for viewing by Verizon Wireless subscribers via its V-Cast system, but were delayed by contract disputes.[191][192] The mobisodes were renamed Lost: Missing Pieces and aired from November 7, 2007 to January 28, 2008.In addition to tie-in novels, several other products based on the series, such as toys and games, have been licensed for release. A video game, Lost: Via Domus, was released to average reviews, developed by Ubisoft, for game consoles and home computers,[193] while Gameloft developed a Lost game for mobile phones and iPods.[194] Cardinal Games released a Lost board game on August 7, 2006.[195] TDC Games created a series of four 1000-piece jigsaw puzzles ("The Hatch," "The Numbers," "The Others," and "Before the Crash"), which, when put together, reveal embedded clues to the overall mythology of Lost. Inkworks has published three sets of Lost trading cards, Season One, Season Two, and Revelations.[196] In May 2006, McFarlane Toys announced recurring lines of character action figures[197] and released the first series in November 2006, with the second series being released July 2007. Furthermore, ABC sold a myriad of Lost merchandise in their online store, including clothing, jewelry and other collectibles.[198] In November 2010, more than five months after the final episode aired, DK Publishing released a 400-page reference titled The Lost Encyclopedia, written by Tara Bennett and Paul Terry. The book compiled information from the TV show producers "writers bible," listing nearly every character, chronological event, location, and plot detail of the series, filling in the gaps for die hard fans.[199] Quotations related to Lost at Wikiquote  Media related to Lost at Wikimedia CommonsLost at TV.com     1 Synopsis

1.1 Overview
1.2 Mythology and interpretations
1.3 Recurring elements

1.1 Overview1.2 Mythology and interpretations1.3 Recurring elements2 Cast and characters3 Production

3.1 Conception
3.2 Casting
3.3 Filming
3.4 Promotion
3.5 Music

3.1 Conception3.2 Casting3.3 Filming3.4 Promotion3.5 Music4 Impact and reception

4.1 Ratings
4.2 Awards
4.3 Critical reception
4.4 Fandom and popular culture

4.1 Ratings4.2 Awards4.3 Critical reception4.4 Fandom and popular culture5 Distribution

5.1 Online
5.2 Home video releases

5.1 Online5.2 Home video releases6 Other media

6.1 Licensed merchandise

6.1 Licensed merchandise7 References8 External links1.1 Overview1.2 Mythology and interpretations1.3 Recurring elements3.1 Conception3.2 Casting3.3 Filming3.4 Promotion3.5 Music4.1 Ratings4.2 Awards4.3 Critical reception4.4 Fandom and popular culture5.1 Online5.2 Home video releases6.1 Licensed merchandiseOfficial websiteLost at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe template Tv.com is being considered for deletion.Ajira Airways fictional airline featured in season five promotional materialLost University fictional university.
Patrick Galen Dempsey (born January 13, 1966) is an American actor, best known for his role as neurosurgeon Dr. Derek Shepherd ("McDreamy") on the ABC medical drama Grey's Anatomy. Prior to Grey's Anatomy he made several television appearances and was nominated for an Emmy Award. He has also appeared in several films, including Sweet Home Alabama, Made of Honor, Valentine's Day, Flypaper, Freedom Writers, and Transformers: Dark of the Moon.Dempsey was born in Lewiston, Maine, and grew up in Buckfield, Maine. His mother, Amanda M. (ne Caisson), was a school secretary, and his father, William A. Dempsey, was an insurance salesman.[1][2][3] He attended Buckfield High School and St. Dominic Regional High School.[4] He was an adept juggler, tying for second in a national juggling competition.[5] He was also an accomplished skier and while in high school won the Maine state slalom championship.As a child, Dempsey attended Camp Wekeela located in Hartford, Maine.Dempsey was diagnosed with dyslexia at age twelve. He told Barbara Walters on her 2008 Oscar special that he thinks dyslexia "made him what he is today." Its given me a perspective of  you have to keep working, Dempsey told Walters. I have never given up.[6]Dempsey was discovered by an invitation to audition for a role in the stage production of Torch Song Trilogy. His audition was successful, and he spent the following four months touring with the company in Philadelphia. He followed this with another tour, Brighton Beach Memoirs, in the lead role, which was directed by Gene Saks. Dempsey has also made notable appearances in the stage productions of On Golden Pond, with the Maine Acting Company, and as Timmy (the Martin Sheen role) in a 1990 Off-Broadway revival of The Subject Was Roses co-starring with John Mahoney and Dana Ivey at the Roundabout Theatre in New YorkDempsey's first major feature film role was at age 21 with Beverly D'Angelo in the movie In The Mood, the true World War II story about Ellsworth Wisecarver whose relationships with older married women created a national uproar. This was followed by the teen comedy Can't Buy Me Love in 1987 with actress Amanda Peterson and Some Girls with Jennifer Connelly in 1988. This film was a flop. In 1989, Dempsey had the lead role in the films Loverboy with actress Kirstie Alley and Happy Together with actress Helen Slater.Dempsey made a number of featured appearances in television in the 1990s; he was cast several times in pilots that were not picked up for a full season, including lead roles in the TV versions of the films The Player and About A Boy. However he received good reviews[7] as he portrayed real-life mob boss, Meyer Lansky in 1991, when Mobsters was put on the screen. His first major television role was a recurring role as Will's closeted sportscaster boyfriend on Will & Grace. He went on to play the role of Aaron Brooks, Lily & Judy's psychologically unbalanced brother, on Once & Again. Dempsey received an Emmy[8] nomination in 2001 as Outstanding Guest Actor in a Drama Series for the role of Aaron. In 1993, he played a young John F. Kennedy in the 2-part TV mini-series JFK: Reckless Youth. In 2000, he also had a role as Detective Kincaid on Scream 3.Dempsey had a high-profile role as the fianc of Reese Witherspoon's character in Sweet Home Alabama. In 2004, he co-starred in the highly acclaimed HBO production Iron Jawed Angels, opposite Hilary Swank and Anjelica Huston. He also appeared as special guest star in The Practice for its 3-episode finale season (8x13-8x15), as a married man who murdered his lover.In 2007, Dempsey starred in the Disney film Enchanted, and the Paramount Pictures film Freedom Writers where he reunited with his Iron Jawed Angels co-star Hilary Swank. He also voiced the character Kenai in Brother Bear 2. Dempsey's most recent roles include the 2008 film Made of Honor as Tom and the 2010's romantic comedy Valentine's Day; the latter film, directed by Garry Marshall, follows five interconnecting stories about Los Angelinos anticipating (or in some cases dreading) the holiday of love.[9]Universal Pictures acquired the rights to the prize-winning novel The Art of Racing in the Rain in July 2009, for Dempsey to star in.[10] The project has not been able to find a director.[11] Dempsey starred as Dylan Gould in the 2011 movie Transformers: Dark of the Moon.[12][13]On November 1, 2012, Deadline.com reported that Patrick Dempsey is set to star in the romantic comedy "Wonderful Tonight" playing opposite Amanda Seyfried. [14]Dempsey has received significant public attention for his role as Dr. Derek Shepherd in the drama Grey's Anatomy. Prior to landing the role of Derek Shepherd, Dempsey auditioned for the role of Dr. Gregory House on another medical show, House. Initially a midseason replacement, the show was very well received and has become a highly rated program. Dempsey's character Derek is often referred to as "McDreamy" and has received press attention for his sex appeal, and his chemistry with Grey's Anatomy co-star Ellen Pompeo was well received by fans and critics. Dempsey also appeared in one episode of Private Practice, playing the same character as in Grey's Anatomy.[15]Dempsey was nominated for Best Performance by an Actor in a Television Series  Drama at the 2006 Golden Globes for the role. His success on the show has led to his becoming a spokesman for Mazda and State Farm Insurance. Regarding the eighth season, Dempsey stated that, "It will be my last. I do not know about the other characters. But for me it's over."[16][17][18] But, after this comment stirred up some fans, his publicist released a statement saying that Dempsey's comments were somewhat taken out of context. His rep claims that he was referring to his contract ending next season and that it's uncertain what he will do next. On May 9, 2012, it was announced that the six original cast members including him had signed up for two more seasons.[19]BuddyTV ranked him #74 on its list of "TV's Sexiest Men of 2011".[20]He has been the face of L'Oreal and Versace and was featured in ads for Serengeti sun glasses. In November 2008 he launched an Avon fragrance named Unscripted, and due to its success, a second fragrance named Patrick Dempsey 2 was launched in October 2009.[dated info] On September 29, 2012, Mexican cable company Cablems launched an advertising campaign featuring Patrick Dempsey as the love interest of a domestic worker who comes across his profile on an online dating site. [21]Dempsey enjoys auto racing in his spare time, having competed in the 24 Hours of Le Mans, Rolex 24 at Daytona sports car race, and Tecate SCORE Baja 1000 off-road race. He was a co-owner of the Vision Racing IndyCar Series team and current owner of Dempsey Racing, which is presently racing two Mazda RX-8 cars in the GRAND-AM Rolex Sports Car Series GT class. He participates in this series as often as his schedule allows, as he is unable to race while filming a movie due to insurance issues. In 2009, he raced a Team Seattle Advanced Engineering Ferrari F430 GT in the 2009 24 Hours of Le Mans's GT2 class, and finished ninth in class.[22]Dempsey announced he would be in the 2011 Rolex 24 at Daytona along with other races throughout the season in a Mazda RX-8.[23] Dempsey finished in third place in the GT Class of the Rolex 24 at Daytona.In 2012, Dempsey will compete in the Grand-Am Continental Tire Sports Car Challenge behind the wheel of an Aston Martin Racing-Multimatic Motorsports Aston Martin Vantage GT4, which, after 5 successful racing seasons in Europe, will be making its debut on American tracks.Dempsey also formed the Dempsey Racing team which competes in the American Le Mans Series. The team fields a full-time Oreca FLM09 in the Prototype Challenge class as well as a Lola B12/80 coupe in the Prototype 2 class (with Patrick himself driving) from Laguna Seca onward.Dempsey is also known to have a collection of sports and collector cars.Dempsey was diagnosed with dyslexia at age 12. As a result, it is necessary for him to memorize all his lines in order to perform, even for auditions where he was unlikely to get the part.[24][25]Entertainment Weekly put Dempsey's hair on its end-of-the-decade "best-of" list, saying, "What made Grey's Anatomy a mega-medi-hit? It could have something to do with creator Shonda Rhimes' scalpel-sharp writingor McDreamy's impossibly luxurious man hair. Just saying."[26] In 2005, People magazine ranked him second in its annual list of "Sexiest Men Alive"[27] and again in 2006.[28]He has been married twice. In 1987, he married actress and acting coach Rocky Parker (born 26 February 1940 in Brooklyn, New York), who was also the mother of his best friend (Corey Parker). She appeared with Dempsey in the film In the Mood. The couple divorced in 1994.On July 31, 1999, Dempsey married Jillian Fink. The couple have three children, daughter Tallulah Fyfe (born February 20, 2002) and twins Sullivan Patrick and Darby Galen (born February 1, 2007). The family resides in Malibu and also has a home in Texas. They own a farmhouse in Maine as well, but that property is currently for sale.In 1997, Dempsey's mother was diagnosed with ovarian cancer. Her cancer has relapsed five times over the past fifteen years. In response to his mother's bouts with cancer, Dempsey helped start the Patrick Dempsey Center at Central Maine Medical Center in his home town of Lewiston, Maine. In October 2009 when Dempsey introduced the first Dempsey Challenge, registration was closed after reaching the goal of 3,500 cyclists, runners and walkers. The event raised more than $1 million for the cancer center. His mother was in the crowd as Dempsey finished his 50-mile ride.[29] The Challenge has since become an annual October event presented by Amgen in the LewistonAuburn area.[30]1 Early life2 Career

2.1 Early career
2.2 1990s and 2000s
2.3 Grey's Anatomy
2.4 Other work

2.1 Early career2.2 1990s and 2000s2.3 Grey's Anatomy2.4 Other work3 Race car driver4 Personal life

4.1 Marriages and family

4.1 Marriages and family5 Patrick Dempsey Center for Cancer Hope & Healing and Dempsey Challenge6 Filmography7 References8 External links2.1 Early career2.2 1990s and 2000s2.3 Grey's Anatomy2.4 Other work4.1 Marriages and familyPatrick Dempsey at the Internet Movie DatabasePatrick Dempsey at Yahoo! MoviesPatrick Dempsey at Emmys.com
This is an episode listing for the comedy drama TV series Ugly Betty. The show premiered on September 28, 2006 on ABC in the United States and ended its run on April 14, 2010 after 85 episodes.NotesNotes Gogona Gareubnidan (2010): Tina Makharadze1 Series overview2 Main series

2.1 Season 1: 200607
2.2 Season 2: 200708
2.3 Season 3: 200809
2.4 Season 4: 200910

2.1 Season 1: 2006072.2 Season 2: 2007082.3 Season 3: 2008092.4 Season 4: 2009103 Mode After Hours episodes

3.1 Season 1
3.2 Season 2
3.3 Season 3

3.1 Season 13.2 Season 23.3 Season 34 References2.1 Season 1: 2006072.2 Season 2: 2007082.3 Season 3: 2008092.4 Season 4: 2009103.1 Season 13.2 Season 23.3 Season 3"Swag" was originally scheduled to be aired as the 4th episode, but was moved to 11th by the network. The change resulted in a number of continuity problems, which were "fixed" by making most of the episode a flashback and adding scenes with Betty telling Christina the bulk of the story. In Italy, Denmark, Spain, India and the Philippines, the episode is retained as the 4th episode.[1]On the season 1 DVD box set, "Swag" is listed as episode 4, without the scenes of Betty talking to Christina in a flashback. Other noticeable changes on the DVD were the reversed order of the show's episode chronology: "The Box and the Bunny", which is the second episode, is listed as the third episode, having swapped places with "Queens for a Day". However, "The Box and the Bunny" should be the second episode.Season 2 was originally slated to have a total of 24 episodes, but due to the Writers Guild of America strike, it had 18 episodes with the last five written and produced following the strike's end.Note: ABC placed Ugly Betty on a temporary hiatus after the March 19, 2009 episode to air Samantha Who? and In the Motherhood in the 8-9PM E/P slot, but returned it after the shows complete their runs.[4] Ugly Betty returned on April 30, 2009 to finish its 3rd season, ending with a 2-hour season finale airing on May 21, 2009.[5]Note: Episodes 6674 all aired on Fridays (October 16  December 11, 2009); Episodes 7585 aired on Wednesdays (January 6, 2010  April 14, 2010).Note: Season 4 was originally slated to have a total of 22 episodes but was reduced to 20 episodes.
