Phantom is the tenth book in Terry Goodkind's epic fantasy series The Sword of Truth. Phantom debuted in the #1 spot on the New York Times and Publishers Weekly best seller lists, among others.Following the hit sales of the other books in the Sword of Truth series, Tor ran 500,000 copies in Phantom's first printing.[2] The author pre-signed 10,000 copies of the book before the release.[2]A continuation of the story in Chainfire, Phantom begins with Richard Rahl searching for his wife, Kahlan Amnell, whom only he remembers. As the reader discovered in Chainfire, the spell used to make everyone forget Kahlan, Chainfire, was initiated by the Sisters of the Dark, working for the Keeper of the Underworld. Richard reveals that not only the spell but also all magic has been corrupted due to the effects of the chimes being in the world. Due to this corruption Kahlan is not invisible to everyone and Jagang uses this fact to continue to control her.This book continues Richard's quest to find his wife, Kahlan, and release her from the Chainfire spell. Kahlan still travels with the Sisters of the Dark Ulicia, Cecilia, and Armina as they hurry to catch up with the fourth Sister, Tovi. Unbeknownst to them Tovi is dead, stabbed by Samuel in the previous book and allowed to die after being questioned by Nicci. They stop at the White Horse Inn, and the Sisters are shocked when the innkeeper can see Kahlan and correctly title her. Because of the Chainfire enacted on Kahlan, no one should be able to know she exists. She was erased from the memories of all who knew her and anyone who sees her instantly forgets. The Sisters kill the man and his family, and continue on, traveling toward Caska where they believe Tovi has gone.Back at the Wizard's Keep, Richard senses powerful magic and goes to investigate. He discovers Zedd, Ann, and Nathan in a room where Nicci is caught up in the grips of a powerful spell called a verification web. The web is meant to examine the Chainfire spell and see if there is any way to undo it. Richard realizes that there is something wrong with the spell and tries to convince the others who don't really believe him, but Richard is able to disable the spell. Before Nicci can tell anyone that the spell was indeed corrupted, the deadly beast that Jagang had created to hunt Richard appears in the room. In order to drive it off, Nicci places herself back into the spell form to draw upon the power between life and death. By refusing to actually supply the magic to the spell, the power of life and the power of the underworld come together and strike the beast, driving it away for the time being.When Nicci awakens for the second time, Richard has saved her from the spell. Richard realizes that the corruption to the spell was caused by the presence of the three chimes being in the world, and the chimes not only corrupted the verification web, but they have corrupted all magic. Even the Chainfire spell was affected by the chimes (Reechani, Sentrosi, Vasi), and now he (Richard) believes that the Chimes are infecting anything with magic, not just Kahlan.Shota arrives at the Keep, bringing Jebra in an attempt to make Richard believe that he is wasting his time trying to find Kahlan when there is a whole world that needs to be saved from the Imperial Order. To that end, Shota instructs Jebra to testify to the horrific terrors that had befallen the people of Ebissinia. Shota reveals that Samuel was under the control of another witch woman, Six. Richard says that he understands the situations but Shota is still unconvinced and touches Richard with her power, allowing his mind to see a vision that places Richard in the position of the slaughtered men of Ebissinia, who are condemned to death while listening to the vulgar promises of what the soldiers will do to their wives. In this dream-like reality, Richard sees Kahlan begging for his life and they profess their love for each other.As Nicci and Shota have a minor confrontation, Richard realizes that Shota is right. Despite how important Kahlan's life is to him it's only one life, while the whole of the New World is threatened by the Order. Pleased, Shota gives Richard a prediction she has had from the flow of time. Long ago, the First Wizard Barracus went to the Temple of the Winds to ensure that someone with the Subtractive side of the gift would be born again. After Barracus came back from the temple he threw himself out his window, but not before he left a special book for Richard. Before Shota leaves, she gives him one last cryptic message: Richard's mother was not the only one to die in the fire that claimed her life.After such events, Richard comes to understand that he was right all along when earlier he stated that it is impossible to fight the hordes of Imperial Order forces head on in one great final battle. Richard, Nicci and Cara travel in the Sliph to the main army in D'Hara and explains to the Commanders what he has come to understand and his position. Richard issues a command that the army be broken up into smaller units, stating that if the Old World wants war then they shall have it. The tactic being that while the Imperial Order is here in the New World, they shall become the Phantom D'Haran Legion, bringing death and destruction to the Old World. The death and destruction will be an endless reminder of what will happen to those who support the Order. He orders the troops to kill anyone who opposes them, burn crops, and bring him the ears of anyone who preaches the beliefs of the Order. His troops destroy entire garrisons of troops, impaling their heads on stakes, skin bureaucrats of the empire alive and impale them on stakes, and follow the strategy of slash-and-burn warfare to starve the men, women and children of the empire.The three Sisters of the Dark and Kahlan follow Sister Tovi's trail to Caska, where they are surprised to find not Tovi (who has been dead since the end of the previous book), but Jagang waiting for them. Jagang once again proves that he is a master strategist by revealing that he had never left the Sisters of the Dark's minds and that by tricking them into thinking their fake bond with Richard Rahl was working, he had learnt much from their quest. He also captures Kahlan, him being able to see her because he was linked to the Dark Sister when they performed the Chainfire spell on Kahlan, and was therefore unaffected by it. Meanwhile, while traveling back to the Wizard's Keep through the Sliph, Richard is attacked by Jagang's beast and magic conjured by the previously thought to be dead Princess Violet (now Queen Violet at Six's instruction), causing him to become separated from his power. The Sliph instigates "emergency measures" instilled in her thousands of years ago by First Wizard Barracus and shunts Richard to an emergency escape portal somewhere in the wilds close to the land of the Night Wisps. Richard must pass a test Barracus left for him before the Sliph will tell him why he needs to see the Night Wisps. After a brief visit to the land of the Night Wisps to recover a secret book left by the War Wizard Barracus (who left the outfit and ruby pendant), Secrets of a War Wizard's Power. Richard is captured by Six and taken to Tamarang. There, he hides Secrets of a War Wizard's Power in the room that he was tortured in during Wizard's First Rule, deciding that regardless of what happens to him, he cannot let anyone find the book that Barracus hid for 3000 years for him. While being taken to Violet, Richard attempts an escape killing dozens of Imperial Order soldiers. The commanding officer is impressed with his skill and takes Richard away as a captive to become a player of Ja'La dh Jin (Game of Life) on his division's team.The division of the Imperial Order rejoins the main forces, now laying siege on the People's Palace. Richard catches a glimpse of Kahlan as he is taken into the camp and revives her will to fight on and remember her past. Back at the Wizard's Keep, while discussing Richard's desire to save Kahlan, Zedd states that even though Richard is trying hard, Kahlan is as good as dead. The Chainfire spell put in place over her destroys memories, not just overlap them or bury them; Kahlan will never remember any of them, even Richard, ever again. Nicci has a revelation about the all important Prophecies that Richard must lead them in the final battle and puts one of the Boxes of Orden in play in Richard's name, so that not only the Sisters of the Dark have superiority in that matter.The book ends with a few major cliffhangers: Richard is a captive in the Imperial Order's main camp, without his sword or his gift; Kahlan is a captive of Jagang with a Rada'han; the Boxes of Orden are in play by Sister Ulicia; there is a problem with Chainfire and with magic; that the Imperial Order is slowly making their way into the central stronghold of the D'Haran forces: the People's Palace, but also the D'Haran forces appear able to cut off the Imperial Order supply lines just as winter starts.The Wizard's Tenth Rule, revealed in Phantom, is:It is explained in the novel as follows: "People who for whatever reason don't want to see the truth can be acutely hostile to it and shrill in their denunciation of it. They frequently turn their venomous antagonism on whoever dares to point out that truth ... To those seeking the truth, it's a matter of simple, rational, self-interest to always keep reality in view. Truth is rooted in reality, after all, not the imagination."1 Publishing history2 Plot introduction3 Plot summary4 Characters in "Phantom"5 Wizard's Tenth Rule6 References7 External linksRichard RahlKahlan AmnellZeddicus Zu'l ZoranderCaraNicciVernaAnnNathan RahlSister UliciaSister ArminaSister CeciliaShotaSixChaseRachelEmperor JagangQueen VioletOfficial Terry Goodkind websiteChapter 1 of the bookUnofficial Terry Goodkind website (endorsed by Terry Goodkind)Welcome to the Sword of Truth Wiki, including characters, places, items, etc.The Name of the Wind (The Kingkiller Chronicle: Day One) is a fantasy novel by Patrick Rothfuss, the first book in a series called The Kingkiller Chronicle. It was published in 2007 by DAW Books with two possible hardcovers: one features the face of the Green Man with the title letters in silver and the other shows the figure of Kvothe with the letters printed in gold. A new cover was released in subsequent reprints, depicting a cloaked figure under a dark sky in a windy field.Rothfuss spent 7 years writing The Name of the Wind, drawing on his interests and hobbies, and the education he pursued over 9 years in college. A short story excerpted from the novel The Wise Man's Fear (sequel to The Name of the Wind)[1], "The Road to Levinshire", won the Writers of the Future contest in 2002, leading to the book's publication. The sequel, The Wise Man's Fear, was released on March 1, 2011 by DAW Books.The book is divided into two time periods, the first in the present and the other covering years of the past, chronicling Kvothe's youth as he tells his story to a Chronicler who asks for the unexaggerated version of his life.The story begins in the backwater town of Newarre, introducing the innkeeper Kote and his assistant Bast. The Inn is sparsely used, and widespread troubles from an ongoing war have further reduced travelers passing through the small town. It is revealed that Kote is actually the legendary hero Kvothe in hiding. Kvothe has a reputation as an unequaled swordfighter, magician and musician, who among other things is rumored to have killed a king and is somehow responsible for the war. His assistant and student Bast is a prince from the mystical Fae, magical creatures of great beauty but vulnerable to iron. Kvothe saves Chronicler, a travelling scribe, from spider-like creatures called Scrael. Chronicler recognizes him as Kvothe and asks to record his story. Kvothe initially refuses but eventually gives in, to tell the truth about the events that made him a legend. He tells Chronicler that this will take three days (corresponding to the planned trilogy of novels).Kvothe begins his story with his childhood amongst the Edema Ruh, a troupe of travelling performers. Kvothe is extremely intelligent and a talented musician, particularly with a lute. The troupe picks up an arcanist by the name of Abenthy, a graduate of the University , who begins to train Kvothe in matters of science and "sympathy", a form of magic which allows the user to link two objects together and cause changes in the bound object by manipulating the other (a system drawing equally from modern thermodynamics, quantum entanglement and voodoo dolls). Abenthy also knows true names, thus giving him power over those things he knows the true name of. Kvothe witnesses Abenthy calling the wind to fend off suspicious townspeople and henceforth vows to discover the titular "Name of the Wind."Meanwhile, Kvothe's father Arliden is composing a song about the "Chandrian," a mythical force of evil and corruption. This leads the Chandrian to find and kill the troupe; Kvothe survives by having been out in the woods at the time. Heavily traumatized, he spends three years in the city of Tarbean as a street urchin. After a storyteller named Skarpi tells Kvothe a tale of the Chandrian and their enemies, the Amyr, he makes his way to the University to continue his education and gather further information on the subject. On the road to the University Kvothe meets Denna, a beautiful and talented young woman with whom he immediately is infatuated. Kvothe is accepted at the university despite his lack of tuition funds and performs admirably as a student, but also faces difficulties due to continuous money problems and rivalries with the wealthy student Ambrose and the arrogant Master Hemme.Kvothe's research about the Chandrian is marred by taking a candle inside the University's famous Archives, resulting in a sustained banishment from the Archives by the Master Archivist. Kvothe buys a lute despite his poverty and performs at a famous musical tavern called Eolian in the hopes of earning some much-needed money. At the Eolian, he earns talent pipes that designate him as a master musician, and also meets Denna again, with whom he develops a romantic but unassuming friendship. Kvothe is careful not to chase Denna away, who has many suitors and often disappears for weeks at a time, but seems to return his feelings.When Kvothe hears reports of blue fire and murder at a nearby wedding, he realizes that it could be the work of the Chandrian, and rides to a small town called Trebon in his attempt to find proof that the Chandrian do exist. After an unexpected reunion with Denna, who was meeting with her mysterious patron, the two set out to find out what happened at the wedding. They meet a local farmer who reported strange sightings of blue fire, and later that night they encounter a massive fire-breathing herbivorous draccus. The draccus is later discovered to be addicted to denner trees (the trees have a resin that can be made into highly addictive drugs) and goes on a rampage through the town of Trebon, nearly burning down the whole town before Kvothe manages to kill it with a clever use of sympathy. Upon returning to the University, Ambrose taunts Kvothe, taking and breaking Kvothe's lute. Kvothe subconsciously breaks Ambrose's arm by roaring out the name of the wind. Because of this feat, Master Namer Elodin accepts Kvothe as a advanced student and attempts to teach him the power of naming.In the inn, the first day ends when a mercenary possessed by a demon arrives at the inn and attacks the patrons. Kvothe attempts to use sympathy to light the man on fire, but fails. After the man is killed by a patron, and Chronicler goes to bed, Bast breaks into Chronicler's room and urges him to focus Kvothe on the more heroic aspects of his story. Chronicler refuses, wanting Kvothe's story as true and objective as possible, but Bast threatens him. Bast explains to Chronicler that he lured him to the inn because he wanted to shake Kvothe out of his monotonous life, that Kvothe's simple life is killing him and that Bast hopes that some good will come from the Chronicler helping Kvothe remember his days of glory.See The Kingkiller Chronicle for an additional description of key characters and the setting.1 Structure2 Plot3 Awards and honors4 Characters5 ReferencesPercy Jackson & the Olympians is a pentalogy of adventure and fiction books written by Rick Riordan. Set in the United States, the books are predominantly based on Greek mythology and deal with a demigod, Percy Jackson, and his quest to stop the rise of the Titan lord Kronos. All five books are seen from Percy's witty and sardonic point of view. The series tackles themes like coming of age, love and teenage angst.More than 20 million copies of the books have been sold in more than 10 countries.[1]As of October 28, 2011, the series has been on the New York Times best seller list for children's book series for 223 weeks.[2] The first book was adapted into a film titled Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning Thief in 2010, which was commercially successful, but received mixed reviews. An adaptation of The Sea of Monsters, titled Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters, is due to be released in 2013.[3]Development for both The Lightning Thief and the Percy Jackson series as a whole, commenced when Riordan first began making stories for his son Haley, who had (at the time) recently been diagnosed with ADHD and dyslexia. His son had been studying Greek mythology in second grade and requested that his father come up with bedtime stories based on Greek myths. Riordan had been a Greek mythology teacher in middle school for many years, and was able to remember enough stories to please his son. Soon Riordan ran out of myths and his son then requested that he make new ones using the same characters from Greek myths and add new ones. Thus, Riordan created the fictional character Percy Jackson and made the story of how he would travel across the United States to recover Zeus's thunderbolt.In June 1994, Riordan had completed his manuscript for The Big Red Tequila and began looking for agents. During that time, he visited multiple local colleges looking for good editors until he eventually found an agent.[4] While he left his manuscript to his agent and editor to review, Riordan took his book to a group of 6th, 7th, and 8th graders to read and give their critique. Ultimately he gained their approval, and with their help, came up with the name of the book and created the way Percy's sword worked.[5] In June 1997, Riordan signed with Bantam Books to prepare the book for publishing.[4] In 2004, the book was sold to Miramax Books for enough money for Riordan to quit his job to focus on writing.[6] After it was released on 28July 2005, it sold over 1.2million copies. The book was released in multiple versions including hardcover, paperback and audio editions.[7][8] It has been translated into multiple languages and published all over the world.[9]The Lightning Thief is the first book in the series. It was released on June 28, 2005.A 12 year old demigod named Percy Jackson lives in New York with his mother, Sally Jackson. During a field trip to a museum, Percy is attacked by "A Fury" disguised as his pre-algebra teacher, Ms. Dodds, and he vaporises her with a sword given to him by Mr. Brunner, his Latin teacher. After Ms. Dodds is killed, no one in his school remembers knowing her. At the end of the school year, Percy heads home and his mother decides to take him on a vacation. Percy's best friend Grover arrives and reveals himself as a satyr (half goat-half man). Percy tells him about Ms. Dodds while his mom races them to Camp Half-Blood (a camp for demigods). While heading to the camp, they are attacked by the minotaur that is later in the labyrinth. Percy's mother is taken turned into a shimmer of gold thought to be dead, but later revealed to be held captive before he can kill the Minotaur. He killed the Minotaur and, exhausted he passes out. When he wakes, he finds himself in the camp. He meets his former Latin teacher, Mr. Brunner, who turns out to be Chiron (a centaur), and Annabeth Chase (Daughter of Athena). Percy is soon claimed by his Olympian parent, Poseidon (God of the Sea). Later on, he is accused of stealing Zeus' lighting bolt. Although Percy insists that he didn't do it, Zeus (King Of The Gods and Lord of the sky) doesn't believe him. And if he doesn't prove Zeus wrong, there will be a massive war between the gods. Percy, Annabeth, and Grover are given a quest to retrieve Zeus' stolen lightning bolt as Zeus believes Percy stole it. After they get the quest, the trio initially believes Hades (God Of The Underworld) to be the thief and travel across the United States to Los Angeles, where they know the entrance to the underworld is, facing numerous mythological monsters, including Medusa, Echidna, and the Furies. Then Percy fights Ares (God Of War) and retrieved the stolen things. In the end, they learn the real thief was Luke Castellan (Son of Hermes), a camper who'd befriended Percy when he first arrived at Camp Half-Blood. Luke stole the bolt to allow Kronos (the king of the Titans, the Titan Lord, or the Lord of Time) the chance to rise again.The book was adapted into a film by Chris Columbus and 20th Century Fox, under the title Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning Thief on February 12th, 2010.The Sea of Monsters is the second installment in the series, released on April 1, 2006.On Percy's last day of school, he and his friend, Tyson are attacked by giants. Annabeth appears and saves them before leaving for camp. When they arrive, Percy learns that Thalia's tree, the tree protecting the camp, has been poisoned and Chiron has been accused of the poisoning and he was fired. If Thalia's tree fully dies, then the camp borders won't be protected and more Monsters will start attacking the camp.Then Percy has a dream about Grover in a wedding dress because Polyphemus wishes to marry him, thinking he is a female cyclops. Later in the dream, Grover warns Percy,"Sweet dreams! Don't let me die!" This will continue unless they find another way to protect the camp borders or the camp will be overrun by monsters. Percy then finds out that Tyson is his half-brother and a cyclops. To save the tree, a quest is given to find the Golden Fleece. Clarisse La Rue, a daughter of Ares, will lead the quest to find the Golden Fleece. Percy, Annabeth, and Tyson sneak off, not just for the Golden Fleece, but to find their friend Grover Underwood, who is trapped by Polyphemus, who wants to marry him. They meet Luke on his ship, but are able to escape. They soon join with Clarisse on her quest. Her ship is destroyed passing through the Sea of Monsters and Annabeth and Percy continue their search for Grover after becoming separated from the others. After encountering the Sirens and Circe, Annabeth and Percy reach the Polyphemus' cave. They are able to rescue Grover and Clarisse and Tyson helps defeats Polyphemus. They recover the Fleece and head to Miami. Clarisse heads to camp and the others are captured by Luke. They are about to be killed before Chiron and the Party Ponies (other centaurs) rescue them and take them back to camp. The Fleece is able to save the tree, but it also revives Thalia, whose spirit was in the tree.This book is being adapted into a film by 20th Century Fox, under the title Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters which is slated to be released on the 16th of August 2013The Titan's Curse is the third installment in the series. It was released on May 1, 2007.[10]Percy, Annabeth, and Thalia are sent to rescue two half-bloods, Bianca and Nico Di-Angelo. While on this mission, they are attacked by a manticore, but are saved by the Hunters of Artemis. Annabeth is taken captive when the manticore flees. The Hunters, Percy, Thalia, Nico, and Bianca Di-Angelo and Grover are sent to camp by Artemis and Apollo. Artemis is soon taken captive and a quest is issued. Grover, Thalia, Bianca and Zo Nightshade, Artemis's lieutenant, go to rescue Artemis. Percy follows and soon joins the quest. Bianca is killed while facing an automaton. They learn that the Titan Atlas has escaped and was behind the kidnapping of Artemis. Atlas is defeated and returned to holding the sky, but Zoe is killed by Atlas who is her father. Thalia replaces Zo as Artemis' lieutenant during the gods' summit. Thalia's induction as a lieutenant of Artemis ensures that she never reaches 16, thus escaping the prophecy but leaving Percy as the only one who can fulfill it. They return to camp and Percy informs Nico about Bianca's death. He blames Percy, accusing him of failing to protect her and runs away. Percy learns that the underworld god, Hades, is Nico's father.The Battle of the Labyrinth is the fourth installment in the series. It was released on May 6, 2008.After being attacked by monsters, Percy returns to Camp Half-Blood and learns about the labyrinth. During a war game, Annabeth and Percy find an entrance into the Labyrinth in camp. Percy soon learns that Luke will use the entrance to lead his army through the Labyrinth straight into the heart of camp. Annabeth is chosen to lead a quest to prevent it, and chooses to bring Tyson,Percy,and Grover, even though it was traditional to bring only 2 companions on a quest, as explained by Chiron. While in the Labyrinth, Percy and Annabeth become separated from Grover and Tyson. They encounter Nico, who begins to forgive Percy. Percy and Annabeth arrive under Mount St. Helens, where Annabeth kisses Percy. Percy accidentally causes St. Helens to erupt and washes ashore on Calypso's Island. He returns, rather than staying with her, stating that she would always be his biggest "what-if". Then he and Annabeth recruit Rachel Dare to be a guide in the Labyrinth, finding her sight and knowledge useful for the quest. Daedalus is shown to be alive and to have given Ariadne's string to Luke. They find Grover and Tyson and discover Pan, and Grover tells him that he must return to the world. But, Pan says that he cannot come and before dying tells Grover to spread the word that Great God Pan has died. Percy also finds Luke's body in Kronos' coffin, saying that there was a hole were Luke's heart should have been. After Pan's warning, they flee to camp, trying to stop the invasion. Kronos' forces attack the camp but are defeated. After the battle, Daedalus sacrifices himself to destroy the Labyrinth, as it's tied to his lifeforce.The Last Olympian, the fifth and final book in the Percy Jackson series, was released on May 5, 2009.[11]Percy Jackson learns Kronos' forces are preparing to attack Olympus. Seeking to defeat Kronos, Percy bathes in the River Styx, making his body invincible except one small area, the only vulnerable part of his body. Kronos leads a siege of New York City and puts its citizens to sleep. Percy leads the campers, Hunters, nature spirits, and centaurs to protect Mount Olympus from Kronos and his forces. While they protect Olympus, the gods are holding on the Typhon monster, as he makes his way to New York. Kronos, possessing Luke's body, forces his way into Olympus and he and Percy battle in Olympus' throne room. Typhon reaches New York but is defeated by Percy's father Poseidon. Luke is able to overcome Kronos. Percy gives Luke Annabeth's knife, and Luke stabs himself in his mortal spot (as he also was invulnerable from bathing in the River Styx) to temporarily destroy Kronos and save Mt. Olympus. The gods reward Percy and his friends, offering him immortality. He refuses, but they grant him one request. He requests the gods to claim all their children and have a cabin for all the gods, even the minor ones. Rachel Elizabeth Dare becomes the oracle and reads the next great prophecy. At the end Percy and Annabeth earnestly start their relationship. At the final sentence of the book, Percy says, "For once, I didn't look back," and then runs off to meet Annabeth.The Demigod Files, also written by Rick Riordan, is the first companion book to the series. It was released February10, 2009, featuring three short stories, interviews with the campers, puzzles and pictures.[12] It is set between The Battle of the Labyrinth and The Last Olympian.[13] The book received mixed reviews, with some reviewers criticizing the lack of substantial material and others commending the writing of the short stories.[13]The Ultimate Guide is a companion book, second to the series, released on January 19, 2010. This book has a magnetic cover and holographic character pictures that change into four different characters. Its 156 pages include trading cards, full-color diagrams and maps.[14] It also includes a dictionary of almost every monster Percy faces in the series, with pictures beside some, as well as various activities. The book tells of Percy Jackson's starting life as a half-blood, a tour of the Underworld by Nico diAngelo, and items used throughout the series. There is also a paperback version.A graphic novel based on The Lightning Thief was published on October 12, 2010. It follows a shortened version of Percy's adventures in The Lightning Thief with full color drawings. A graphic novel based on the second book, in the series The Sea of Monsters was released on September 4, 2012 [15]Demigods and Monsters is an unofficial companion book and was released on February 10, 2009.[16] With an introduction by Riordan, it features essays written by various young adult authors that explore, discuss and provide further insight into the Percy Jackson series. At 196 pages, it also contains information on the places and characters of the series, as well as a glossary of Greek myths.[17]The Demigod Diaries contains four new stories with character interviews, illustrations of Annabeth Chase and Percy Jackson, puzzles, and a quiz. The four stories include: Thalia's, Luke's, and Annabeth's adventures before the Percy Jackson and the Olympians series began A first-person narrative from Percy's viewpoint as he and Annabeth complete a task given by Hermes regarding his staff which happens a month after the end of The Last Olympian and before Percy went missing in The Lost Hero. It also includes a short story by Riordan's son, Haley Riordan, revolving around one of the demigods who fought for Kronos during the Second Titan War and survived the battle in Manhattan. It also includes a story involving Jason, Leo, and Piper during their time spent at Camp Half-Blood between The Lost Hero and The Son of Neptune. This is part of the spin-off The Heroes of Olympus, also by Riordan.Rick Riordan relies on Bibliotheca for his characters and plot. In three books, it provides a grand summary of traditional Greek mythology and heroic legends.[18]Listed are the major characters in the series:The Lightning Thief received mostly positive reviews and won awards including the School Library Journal Best Book of 2005.[19] The New York Times praised The Lightning Thief as "perfectly paced, with electrifying moments chasing each other like heartbeats".[20] Author Rick Riordan said of the various awards:"The ultimate compliment for a children's writer is when the kids like it."[21]Like its predecessor, The Sea of Monsters won several prizes and received generally positive reviews as well.[22][23] It sold over 100,000copies in hardcover by the time it was released in paperback[24] and reviewers have praised the storyline, themes and the author's style of writing.[25][26][27] Matt Berman, of Common Sense Media, praised the book, saying "The Percy Jackson series continues to be pure fun, with the author doing nearly everything right to produce a book that few kids will be able to resist."[26] Kirkus reviewed The Battle of the Labyrinth as, "This volume can stand alone, but no one will be able to read just one...look no further for the next Harry Potter, meet Percy Jackson as legions of fans already have."These films have been made from these books:Chris Columbus directed and produced Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning Thief for 20th Century Fox through 1492 Pictures.[28][29] The film was released in 2010 in the United States, Canada and in the United Kingdom on February12 and in Australia on February11.[30] Columbus has stated that he was drawn to directing the Percy Jackson movie because it gave him the "opportunity to do a movie that we haven't really seen before for this generation. When I was a kid, there were movies that dealt with Greek mythology, which in terms of visual effects was really primitive. So I thought this was an opportunity to deal with Greek mythology which children and adults all over the world are fascinated by and it was not a new genre but a new avenue, dealing with mythological creatures in a contemporary setting."The second film in the series, Percy Jackson: Sea of Monsters,[31][32] has a tentative release date of August 16, 2013.[3] Filming began in April 2012.To accompany the film, a video game was produced. Michael Splechta gave it a 6/10, saying "Percy Jackson might not make a splash when it comes to movie tie-in games, but fans of turn-based combat might find some redeeming qualities in this otherwise bare-bones game."[33]A sequel series, also based on Camp Half-Blood and the Greek mythology universe, was written and the first book released on October12, 2010. Like the first series, there will be five books. Riordan has also stated that the time between the two occurrences of great prophecies is not as long as Apollo assumes it will be.[34] The series has been named The Heroes of Olympus, and the first book is The Lost Hero.[35] The official website requires a password, revealed as newhero. On June 1, 2010, the site went live.[36] A medal with a password was needed to unlock the first two chapters. The cover was revealed on June 20, 2010, along with the password.[37] The second book in The Heroes of Olympus, The Son of Neptune, was released in October 2011. The third book, The Mark of Athena was released on October 2, 2012. The fourth book, The House of Hades, is set to be released in the fall of 2013.[[tr:Percy1 Origins2 Books

2.1 The Lightning Thief
2.2 The Sea of Monsters
2.3 The Titan's Curse
2.4 The Battle of the Labyrinth
2.5 The Last Olympian

2.1 The Lightning Thief2.2 The Sea of Monsters2.3 The Titan's Curse2.4 The Battle of the Labyrinth2.5 The Last Olympian3 Supplementary Works

3.1 The Demigod Files
3.2 The Ultimate Guide
3.3 Graphic novel
3.4 Demigods and Monsters
3.5 The Demigod Diaries

3.1 The Demigod Files3.2 The Ultimate Guide3.3 Graphic novel3.4 Demigods and Monsters3.5 The Demigod Diaries4 Main characters5 Reception6 Films

6.1 Video game

6.1 Video game7 The Heroes of Olympus8 See also9 References10 External links2.1 The Lightning Thief2.2 The Sea of Monsters2.3 The Titan's Curse2.4 The Battle of the Labyrinth2.5 The Last Olympian3.1 The Demigod Files3.2 The Ultimate Guide3.3 Graphic novel3.4 Demigods and Monsters3.5 The Demigod Diaries6.1 Video gamePercy Jackson: age 1216; demigod son of Poseidon; the protagonist of the series. Appears in The Lightning Thief, The Sea of Monsters, The Titan's Curse, The Battle of the Labyrinth, and The Last Olympian.Grover Underwood: age 2832; the satyr best friend of Percy; portrayed as teenager since satyrs age half as fast as humans. Appears in The Lightning Thief, The Sea of Monsters, The Titan's Curse, The Battle of the Labyrinth, and The Last Olympian.Annabeth Chase: age 1216; demigod daughter of Athena; girlfriend of Percy. Appears in The Lightning Thief, The Sea of Monsters, The Titan's Curse, The Battle of the Labyrinth, and The Last Olympian.Luke Castellan: age 1923; demigod son of Hermes; an antagonist of the series; allows Kronos use of his body. Appears in The Lightning Thief, The Sea of Monsters, The Titan's Curse, The Battle of the Labyrinth, and (as Kronos) The Last Olympian.Thalia Grace: age 15, immortal demigod daughter of Zeus, lieutenant of the Hunters of Artemis, formerly the tree that guarded Camp Half-Blood. Appears in the end of The Sea of Monsters, The Titan's Curse, and The Last Olympian.Nico di Angelo: age 1012, demigod son of Hades; ignored by Camp Half-Blood due to parentage; Bianca's brother; holds authority over the dead. Appears in The Titan's Curse, The Battle of the Labyrinth, and The Last Olympian. It is also hinted in "The Last Olympian" that he had already discovered Camp Jupiter when he was in one of Percy's dreams in the California area.Tyson: age 810, Percy's half-brother; he is skilled with machines; acts like a child. Appears in The Sea of Monsters, The Titan's Curse, The Battle of the Labyrinth, and The Last Olympian.Clarisse La Rue: age 1418, demigod daughter of Ares; does not get along with Percy; she is very combative. Appears in The Lightning Thief, The Sea of Monsters, The Battle of the Labyrinth, and The Last Olympian.Rachel Elizabeth Dare: age 1416, a clear-sighted mortal girl who assists Percy to see through the mist; later becomes the Oracle. Appears in The Titan's Curse, The Battle of the Labyrinth, and The Last Olympian.Chiron: centaur and activities director of Camp Half-Blood; trainer of heroes, son of Kronos. Appears in The Lightning Thief, The Sea of Monsters, The Titan's Curse, The Battle of the Labyrinth, and The Last Olympian.Ethan Nakamura: Son of the minor goddess Nemesis. Helps awake Kronos. Appears in The Battle of the Labyrinth and The Last Olympian.Percy Jackson & the Olympians: The Lightning ThiefPercy Jackson: Sea of MonstersBook: Percy Jackson & the OlympiansList of artistic depictions of dyslexiaFrom the Files of the Time Rangers  also based on the premise of Greek gods active in the modern USOlympians (Marvel Comics)  comics based on the same premiseOfficial Percy Jackson UK websiteOfficial Percy Jackson US websiteOfficial Percy Jackson Persian websiteRick Riordan's website for news about Percy JacksonPercy Jackson & the Olympians series listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction DatabaseHarry Potter and the Deathly Hallows is the seventh and final of the Harry Potter novels written by British author J. K. Rowling. The book was released on 21July2007 by Bloomsbury Publishing in the United Kingdom, in the United States by Scholastic, and in Canada by Raincoast Books, ending the series that began in 1997 with the publication of Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone. The novel chronicles the events directly following Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince (2005), and the final confrontation between the wizards Harry Potter and Lord Voldemort.Rowling finished writing Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows in January 2007. Before its release, Bloomsbury reportedly spent GB10million to keep the book's contents safe before its release date. American publisher Arthur Levine refused any copies of the novel to be released in advance for press review, although two reviews were submitted early. Shortly before release, photos of all 759 pages of the U.S. edition were leaked and transcribed, leading Scholastic to look for the source that had leaked it.Released globally in 93 countries, Deathly Hallows broke sales records as the fastest-selling book ever, a record it still holds today.[2] It sold 15million copies in the first 24 hours following its release, including more than 11million in the U.S. and UK alone. The previous record, 9million in its first day, had been held by Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. The novel has also been translated into over 120languages, including Ukrainian, Swedish, and Hindi.Major themes in the novel are death and living in a corrupted society, and critics have compared them to Christian allegories. Generally well-received, the book won the 2008 Colorado Blue Spruce Book Award, and the American Library Association named it a "Best Book for Young Adults". A two-part film adaptation began showing in November 2010 when Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows  Part 1 was released; Part 2 was released on 15 July 2011.Throughout the six previous novels in the series, the titular character Harry Potter has struggled with the difficulties of adolescence along with being a famous wizard. When Harry was a baby, Lord Voldemort, a powerful evil wizard, murdered Harry's parents but vanished after attempting to kill Harry. Harry immediately became famous, and was placed in the care of his Muggle (non-magical) relatives Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon.In Philosopher's Stone, Harry re-enters the wizarding world at age 11 and enrolls in Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. He makes friends with Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger. Harry also meets the school's headmaster, Albus Dumbledore, and Professor Severus Snape, who dislikes him. Harry fights Voldemort several times while at school, as the wizard tries to regain a physical form. In Goblet of Fire, Harry is entered in a dangerous magical competition called the Triwizard Tournament. At the conclusion of the Tournament, Harry witnesses the return of Lord Voldemort to full strength. During Order of the Phoenix, Harry and several of his friends face off against Voldemort's Death Eaters, a group of Dark witches and wizards, and narrowly defeat them. In Half-Blood Prince, Harry learns that Voldemort has created six "horcruxes" to become immortal. A Horcrux is a fragment of a person's soul placed within an object so that when the body dies, a part of the soul remains and the person can be regenerated or resurrected.[3] However, the destruction of the creator's body leaves the wizard or witch in a state of half-life, without corporeal form.[4] Two horcruxes have already been destroyed, one by Harry in the events of Chamber of Secrets and one by Dumbledore shortly before the events of Half-Blood Prince. When returning from a mission to discover a horcrux, Dumbledore is murdered by Snape, a former Death Eater whom Harry suspected of secretly remaining loyal to Voldemort. At the conclusion of the book, Harry decides to leave school, find and destroy the remaining four Horcruxes, and defeat the evil wizard Voldemort, once and for all.Following Dumbledore's death, Voldemort continues to gain support and increase his power. When Harry turns seventeen, the protection he has at his aunt and uncle's house will be broken. Before that can happen, at Mad Eye Moody's suggestion, Harry flees to the Burrow with his friends, many of whom use Polyjuice Potion to impersonate him so as to confuse any Death Eaters that may attack. They are indeed attacked shortly after leaving Privet Drive; Mad Eye is killed, and George Weasley wounded, but the rest arrive safely at the Burrow. Ron and Hermione decide to accompany Harry, instead of returning to Hogwarts School for their seventh year, to finish the quest Dumbledore started: to hunt and destroy Voldemort's four remaining Horcruxes. They have little knowledge about the remaining Horcruxes except that one is a locket once owned by Hogwarts' co-founder Salazar Slytherin, one is possibly a cup once owned by co-founder Helga Hufflepuff, a third may be connected with co-founder Rowena Ravenclaw, and the fourth may be Nagini, Voldemort's snake familiar. The whereabouts of the founders' objects is unknown, and Nagini is presumed to be with Voldemort. Before leaving, they attend Ron's brother's Bill's wedding to Fleur Delacour, with Harry disguised by Polyjuice Potion, but the Ministry of Magic is taken over by Death Eaters during the wedding and they barely escape with their lives.Harry, Ron, and Hermione flee to 12 Grimmauld Place in London, which is Sirius Black's family's house, where they learn from the house-elf Kreacher the whereabouts of Salazar Slytherin's locket, which Sirius' brother Regulus stole from Voldemort at the cost of his own life. They successfully recover this Horcrux by infiltrating the Ministry of Magic and stealing it from Dolores Umbridge. Under the object's evil influence and the stress of being on the run, Ron leaves the others. As Harry and Hermione search for the Horcruxes, they learn more about Dumbledore's past, including the insanity and death of Dumbledore's younger sister and his connection to the evil wizard Grindewald. Harry and Hermione ultimately travel to Godric's Hollow, Harry's birthplace and the place where his parents died. They meet the eldery magical historian Bathilda Bagshot, who turns out to be Nagini in disguise and attacks them. They escape into the Forest of Dean, where a mysterious silver doe that appears to be a Patronus leads Harry to the Sword of Hogwarts co-founder Godric Gryffindor, one of the few objects able to destroy Horcruxes, lying at the bottom of an icy lake. When Harry attempts to recover the sword from the pool, the Horcrux attempts to kill him. Ron reappears, saving Harry and then using the sword to destroy the locket. Resuming their search, the trio repeatedly encounter a strange symbol that an eccentric wizard named Xenophilius Lovegood tells them represents the mythical Deathly Hallows. The Hallows are three sacred objects: the Elder Wand, an unbeatable wand; the Resurrection Stone, with the power to summon the dead to the living world; and an infallible Invisibility Cloak. Harry learns that Voldemort is seeking the Elder Wand, recognizes the Resurrection Stone from the second Horcrux, which Dumbledore had destroyed, and realizes that his own Invisibility Cloak is the one mentioned in the story, but he is unaware of the Hallows' significance.The trio are captured and taken to Malfoy Manor, where Bellatrix Lestrange tortures Hermione. Harry and Ron are thrown in the cellar, where they find Luna Lovegood, Ollivander, Dean Thomas, and Griphook. They escape to Shell Cottage (Bill and Fleur's house) with Dobby's help, but at the cost of the house-elf's life. Harry now realizes that the Hallows may have the power to defeat Death and knows that Voldemort robbed Dumbledore's tomb to procure the Elder Wand, but he decides to focus on finding the Horcruxes instead of the Hallows. With Griphook's help, they learn that Helga Hufflepuff's cup - a Horcrux - is hidden in Bellatrix's vault at Gringotts, break into her vault, retrieve the cup, and escape on a dragon, with Griphook swiping the sword and escaping on his own. From his connection to Voldemort's thoughts, Harry learns that another Horcrux is hidden in Hogwarts, which is under the control of Severus Snape. Harry, Ron, and Hermione enter the school through Hogsmeade (being saved by Aberforth Dumbledore, who explains more about Albus's backstory) and - with the help of the teachers - Snape is ousted from the school. Ron and Hermione go to the Chamber of Secrets and destroy the cup using a basilisk fang. The trio then finds Rowena Ravenclaw's diadem (another Horcrux) in the Room of Requirement. Vincent Crabbe casts a Fiendfyre curse in an attempt to kill Harry, Ron, and Hermione, but he instead destroys the diadem, the Room of Requirement, and himself. At this point, a total of five Horcruxes have been destroyed.The Death Eaters and Voldemort besiege Hogwarts, while Harry, Ron, Hermione, their allies, and various magical creatures defend the school. Several major characters are killed in the first wave of the battle, including Remus Lupin, Nymphadora Tonks, and Fred Weasley. Voldemort kills Severus Snape because he believes doing so will make him the Elder Wand's true master, since Snape killed Dumbledore. Harry discovers while viewing Snape's memories that Voldemort inadvertently made Harry into a seventh Horcrux when he attacked him as a baby, which is the true significance of Harry's scar, and that Harry must die in order to destroy Voldemort. These memories also confirm Snape's unwavering loyalty to Dumbledore and that his role as a double-agent against Voldemort never wavered after Voldemort killed Lily Evans, Harry's mother and Snape's one true love. Harry also learns that Dumbledore had less than a year to live when he died, that his death by Snape's hand had been per Dumbledore's request, and that Dumbledore had known that Harry must die. After using the Resurrection Stone to bring back his deceased loved ones for a short while, Harry surrenders himself to death at Voldemort's hand. Voldemort casts the Killing Curse at him, but it only sends Harry into a limbo-like state between life and death.While in this state, Dumbledore's spirit explains to Harry that when Voldemort used Harry's blood to regain his full strength, it protected Harry from Voldemort killing him; however, the Horcrux inside Harry has been destroyed, and Harry can return to his body despite being hit by the Killing Curse. Dumbledore also explains that Harry became the true master of the Deathly Hallows by facing Death, not by seeking to avoid it or conquer it. Harry returns to his body, feigning death, and Voldemort marches victoriously into the castle with his body. However, per Harry's prior instructions, Neville Longbottom kills Nagini, the last Horcrux, with the Sword of Gryffindor. Harry then reveals that he is still alive, and the battle resumes, with Bellatrix Lestrange being killed by Molly Weasley.Harry and Voldemort engage in a final climactic duel. Harry reveals that because he willingly sacrificed himself to death by Voldemort's hand, his act of love would protect the Wizarding community from Voldemort in the same way the sacrifice Harry's mother made protected Harry. Harry also reveals that Snape was not loyal to Voldemort, did not murder Dumbledore, and was never the master of the Elder Wand. Instead, Draco was the master of the Elder Wand after disarming Dumbledore, but, because Harry had disarmed Draco at Malfoy Manor, Harry is the true master of the Elder Wand. Harry claims that the wand will refuse to kill the one to whom it owes allegiance, further protecting Harry. During the duel, Harry refuses to use the killing curse and even encourages Voldemort to feel remorse, one known way to restore Voldemort's shattered soul. Voldemort dies when his own killing curse backfires against Harry's disarming curse, killing himself; the Death Eaters are finally defeated. The wizarding world is able to live in peace once more.The novel, the last in the series, closes with a brief epilogue set 19 years later, in which Harry and Ginny Weasley are a married couple with three children: James Sirius, Albus Severus, and Lily Luna. Ron and Hermione Weasley are also married and have two children, Rose and Hugo. The families meet at King's Cross station, where a nervous Albus is departing for his first year at Hogwarts. Harry's godson, Teddy Lupin, is found kissing Bill and Fleur Weasley's daughter Victoire in a train carriage. Harry sees Draco Malfoy and his wife with their son, Scorpius. Neville Longbottom is now the Hogwarts Herbology professor and remains friends with the two families. Harry comforts Albus, who is worried he will be sorted into Slytherin, and tells his son that one of his two namesakes, Severus Snape, was a Slytherin and the bravest man he had ever met. He adds that the Sorting Hat takes one's choice into account, like it did for Harry. The book ends with these final words: "The scar had not pained Harry for nineteen years. All was well."Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone was published by Bloomsbury, the publisher of all Harry Potter books in the United Kingdom, on 30 June 1997.[5] It was released in the United States on 1 September 1998 by Scholasticthe American publisher of the booksas Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone,[6] after Rowling had received US$105,000 for the American rightsan unprecedented amount for a children's book by a then-unknown author.[7]The second book, Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets was originally published in the UK on 2 July 1998, and in the US on 2 June 1999. Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was then published a year later in the UK on 8 July 1999, and in the US on 8 September 1999.[8] Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire was published on 8 July 2000 at the same time by Bloomsbury and Scholastic.[9] Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix is the longest book in the series at 766 pages in the UK version and 870 pages in the US version.[10] It was published worldwide in English on 21 June 2003.[11] Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince was published on 16 July 2005, and it sold 9million copies in the first 24 hours of its worldwide release.[12][13]Shortly before releasing the title, J. K. Rowling announced that she had considered three titles for the book.[14][15] The final title, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows, named after the mythical Deathly Hallows in the novel, was released to the public on 21December2006, via a special Christmas-themed hangman puzzle on Rowling's website, confirmed shortly afterwards by the book's publishers.[16] When asked during a live chat about the other titles she had been considering, Rowling mentioned Harry Potter and the Elder Wand and Harry Potter and the Peverell Quest.[14]Rowling completed the book while staying at the Balmoral Hotel in Edinburgh in January2007, and left a signed statement on a marble bust of Hermes in her room which read: "J. K. Rowling finished writing Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows in this room (652) on 11January2007".[17] In a statement on her website, she said, "I've never felt such a mixture of extreme emotions in my life, never dreamed I could feel simultaneously heartbroken and euphoric." She compared her mixed feelings to those expressed by Charles Dickens in the preface of the 1850 edition of David Copperfield, "a two-years' imaginative task". "To which," she added, "I can only sigh, try seventeen years, Charles". She ended her message by saying "Deathly Hallows is my favourite, and that is the most wonderful way to finish the series".[18]When asked before publication about the forthcoming book, Rowling stated that she could not change the ending even if she wanted. "These books have been plotted for such a long time, and for six books now, that they're all leading a certain direction. So, I really can't".[19] She also commented that the final volume related closely to the previous book in the series, Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, "almost as though they are two halves of the same novel".[20] She has said that the last chapter of the book was written "in something like 1990", as part of her earliest work on the series.[21] Rowling also revealed she originally wrote the last words to be "something like: 'Only those who he loved could see his lightning scar'". Rowling changed this because she did not want people to think Voldemort would rise again and to say that Harry's mission was over.[22]In a 2006 interview, J. K. Rowling said that the main theme of the series is Harry dealing with death,[23] which was influenced by her mother's death in 1990, from multiple sclerosis.[22][23][24][25] Lev Grossman of Time stated that the main theme of the series was the overwhelming importance of continuing to love in the face of death.[26]Academics and journalists have developed many other interpretations of themes in the books, some more complex than others, and some including political subtexts. Themes such as normality, oppression, survival, and overcoming imposing odds have all been considered as prevalent throughout the series.[27] Similarly, the theme of making one's way through adolescence and "going over one's most harrowing ordealsand thus coming to terms with them" has also been considered.[28] Rowling has stated that the books comprise "a prolonged argument for tolerance, a prolonged plea for an end to bigotry" and that also pass on a message to "question authority and... not assume that the establishment or the press tells you all of the truth".[29]Some political commentators have seen J. K. Rowling's portrayal of the bureaucratised Ministry of Magic and the oppressive measures taken by the Ministry in the later books (like making attendance at Hogwarts School compulsory and the "registration of Mudbloods" with the Ministry) as an allegory of criticising the state.[30]The Harry Potter series has been under criticism for supposedly supporting witchcraft and occult. Before publication of Deathly Hallows, Rowling refused to speak out about her religion, stating, "If I talk too freely, every reader, whether 10 or 60, will be able to guess what's coming in the books".[31] However, many have noted Christian allegories apparent in Deathly Hallows.[31] For example, Harry dies and then comes back to life to save mankind, like Christ. The location where this occurs is King's Cross.[32] Harry also urges Voldemort to show remorse, to restore his shattered soul. Rowling also stated that "my belief and my struggling with religious belief ... I think is quite apparent in this book", which is shown as Harry struggles with his faith in Dumbledore.[33]Deathly Hallows begins with a pair of epigraphs, one by Quaker leader William Penn and one from Aeschylus' The Libation Bearers. Of this, Rowling said "I really enjoyed choosing those two quotations because one is pagan, of course, and one is from a Christian tradition. I'd known it was going to be those two passages since Chamber was published. I always knew [that] if I could use them at the beginning of book seven then I'd cued up the ending perfectly. If they were relevant, then I went where I needed to go. They just say it all to me, they really do".[34]When Harry visits his parents' grave, the biblical reference "The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death" (1 Corinthians 15:26) is inscribed on the grave.[35] The Dumbledores' family tomb also holds a biblical quote: "Where your treasure is, there your heart will be also", which is from Matthew 6:21.[35] Rowling states, "They're very British books, so on a very practical note Harry was going to find biblical quotations on tombstones...[but] I think those two particular quotations he finds on the tombstones at Godric's Hollow, they sum up they almost epitomise the whole series".[35]Harry Potter pundit John Granger additionally noted that one of the reasons the Harry Potter books were so popular is their use of literary alchemy (similar to Romeo and Juliet, C. S. Lewis's Perelandra and Charles Dickens's A Tale of Two Cities) and vision symbolism.[36] In this model, authors weave allegorical tales along the alchemical magnum opus. Since the medieval period, alchemical allegory has mirrored the passion, death and resurrection of Christ.[37] While the entire series utilizes symbols common in alchemy, the Deathly Hallows completes this cycle, tying themes of death, rebirth, and the Resurrection Stone to the principal motif of alchemical allegory, and topics presented in the first book of the series.Christian author Nancy Carpentier Brown also noted many Christian themes, such as Harry marking Mad-Eye Moody's grave with a cross, showing remorse and giving Voldemort a chance to redeem himself, and the Resurrection Stone.[38] She also pointed out that Harry becomes a godfather to Tonks and Lupin's son, Teddy Lupin.[38]The launch was celebrated by an all-night book signing and reading at the Natural History Museum in London, which Rowling attended along with 1,700 guests chosen by ballot.[39] Rowling toured the US in October 2007, where another event was held at Carnegie Hall in New York City with tickets allocated by sweepstake.[40]Scholastic, the American publisher of the Harry Potter series, launched a multi-million dollar "There will soon be 7" marketing campaign with a "Knight Bus" travelling to 40 libraries across the United States, online fan discussions and competitions, collectible bookmarks, tattoos, and the staged release of seven Deathly Hallows questions most debated by fans.[41] In the build-up to the book's release, Scholastic released seven questions that fans would find answered in the final book:[42]J. K. Rowling arranged with her publishers for a poster bearing the face of the missing British child Madeleine McCann to be made available to book sellers when Deathly Hallows was launched on 21July2007, and said that she hoped that the posters would be displayed prominently in shops all over the world.[43]After it was told that the novel would be released on 21July2007, Warner Bros. shortly thereafter said that the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix would be released shortly before the novel would be released, on 13July2007,[44] making many people proclaim that July2007, was the month of Harry Potter.[45]Bloomsbury invested GB10million in an attempt to keep the book's contents secure until the 21July release date.[46] Arthur Levine, U.S. editor of the Harry Potter series, denied distributing any copies of Deathly Hallows in advance for press review, but two U.S. papers published early reviews anyway.[47] There was speculation that some shops would break the embargo and distribute copies of the book early, as the penalty imposed for previous instalmentsthat the distributor would not be supplied with any further copies of the serieswould no longer be a deterrent.[48]In the week before its release, a number of texts purporting to be genuine leaks appeared in various forms. On 16July, a set of photographs representing all 759 pages of the U.S. edition was leaked and was fully transcribed prior to the official release date.[49][50][51][52] The photographs later appeared on websites and peer-to-peer networks, leading Scholastic to seek a subpoena in order to identify one source.[53] This represented the most serious security breach in the Harry Potter series' history.[54] Rowling and her lawyer confirmed that there were genuine online leaks.[55] Reviews published in both The Baltimore Sun and The New York Times on 18July2007, corroborated many of the plot elements from this leak, and about one day prior to release, The New York Times confirmed that the main circulating leak was real.[54]Scholastic announced that approximately one-ten-thousandth (0.0001) of the U.S. supply had been shipped early interpreted to mean about 1,200 copies. One reader in Maryland received a copy of the book in the mail from DeepDiscount.com four days before it was launched, which evoked incredulous responses from both Scholastic and DeepDiscount. Scholastic initially reported that they were satisfied it had been a "human error" and would not discuss possible penalties;[56] however, the following day Scholastic announced that it would be launching legal action against DeepDiscount.com and its distributor, Levy Home Entertainment.[57] Scholastic filed for damages in Chicago's Circuit Court of Cook County, claiming that DeepDiscount engaged in a "complete and flagrant violation of the agreements that they knew were part of the carefully constructed release of this eagerly awaited book."[58] Some of the early release books soon appeared on eBay, in one case being sold to Publishers Weekly for US$250from an initial price of US$18.[59]Asda,[60][61] along with several other UK supermarkets, having already taken pre-orders for the book at a heavily discounted price, sparked a price war two days before the book's launch by announcing they would sell it for just GB5 a copy (about US$8). Other retail chains then also offered the book at discounted prices. At these prices the book became a loss leader. This caused uproar from traditional UK booksellers who argued they had no hope of competing in those conditions. Independent shops protested loudest, but even Waterstone's, the UK's largest dedicated chain bookstore, could not compete with the supermarket price. Some small bookstores hit back by buying their stock from the supermarkets rather than their wholesalers. Asda attempted to counter this by imposing a limit of two copies per customer to prevent bulk purchases. Philip Wicks, a spokesman for the UK Booksellers Association, said, "It is a war we can't even participate in. We think it's a crying shame that the supermarkets have decided to treat it as a loss-leader, like a can of baked beans." Michael Norris, an analyst at Simba Information, said: "You are not only lowering the price of the book. At this point, you are lowering the value of reading."[62]In Malaysia, a similar price war caused controversy regarding sales of the book.[63] Four of the biggest bookstore chains in Malaysia, MPH Bookstores, Popular Bookstores, Times and Harris, decided to pull Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows off their shelves as a protest against Tesco and Carrefour hypermarkets. The retail price of the book in Malaysia is MYR 109.90 (about GB16), while the hypermarkets Tesco and Carrefour sold the book at MYR 69.90 (about GB10). The move by the bookstores was seen as an attempt to pressure the distributor Penguin Books to remove the books from the hypermarkets. However, as of 24July2007, the price war has ended, with the four bookstores involved resuming selling the books in their stores with discount. Penguin Books has also confirmed that Tesco and Carrefour are selling the book at a loss, urging them to practice good business sense and fair trade.[64]The book's early Saturday morning release in Israel was criticised for violating Shabbat. Trade and Industry Minister Eli Yishai commented "It is forbidden, according to Jewish values and Jewish culture, that a thing like this should take place at 2a.m. on Saturday. Let them do it on another day."[65] Yishai indicated that he would issue indictments and fines based on the Hours of Work and Rest Law.[66]The Baltimore Sun's critic, Mary Carole McCauley, noted that the book was more serious than the previous novels in the series and had more straightforward prose.[67] Furthermore, reviewer Alice Fordham from The Times wrote that "Rowling's genius is not just her total realisation of a fantasy world, but the quieter skill of creating characters that bounce off the page, real and flawed and brave and lovable". Fordham concluded, "We have been a long way together, and neither Rowling nor Harry let us down in the end".[68] The New York Times writer Michiko Kakutani agreed, praising Rowling's ability to make Harry both a hero and a character that can be related to.[69]Time magazine's Lev Grossman named it one of the Top 10 Fiction Books of 2007, ranking it at #8, and praised Rowling for proving that books can still be a global mass medium.[26] Novelist Elizabeth Hand criticised that "...the spectacularly complex interplay of narrative and character often reads as though an entire trilogy's worth of summing-up has been crammed into one volume."[70] In a starred review from Kirkus Reviews, the reviewer said, "Rowling has shown uncommon skill in playing them with and against each other, and also woven them into a darn good bildungsroman, populated by memorable characters and infused with a saving, irrepressible sense of fun". They also praised the second half of the novel, but criticised the epilogue, calling it "provacatively sketchy".[71] In another review from The Times, reviewer Amanda Craig said that while Rowling was "not an original, high-concept author", she was "right up there with other greats of children's fiction". Craig went on to say that the novel was "beautifully judged, and a triumphant return to form", and that Rowling's imagination changed the perception of an entire generation, which "is more than all but a handful of living authors, in any genre, have achieved in the past half-century".[72]In contrast, Jenny Sawyer of The Christian Science Monitor said that, "There is much to love about the Harry Potter series, from its brilliantly realised magical world to its multilayered narrative", however, "A story is about someone who changes. And, puberty aside, Harry doesn't change much. As envisioned by Rowling, he walks the path of good so unwaveringly that his final victory over Voldemort feels, not just inevitable, but hollow".[73] In The New York Times, Christopher Hitchens compared the series to World War Two-era English boarding school stories, and while he wrote that "Rowling has won imperishable renown" for the series as a whole, he also stated that he disliked Rowling's use of deus ex machina, that the mid-book camping chapters are "abysmally long", and Voldemort "becomes more tiresome than an Ian Fleming villain".[74] Catherine Bennett of The Guardian praised Rowling for putting small details from the previous books and making them large in Deathly Hallows, such as Grindelwald being mentioned on a Chocolate Frog Card in the first book. While she points out "as her critics say, Rowling is no Dickens", she says that Rowling "has willed into a fictional being, in every book, legions of new characters, places, spells, rules and scores of unimagined twists and subplots".[75]Stephen King criticised the reactions of some reviewers to the books, including McCauley, for jumping too quickly to surface conclusions of the work.[76] He felt this was inevitable, because of the extreme secrecy before launch which did not allow reviewers time to read and consider the book, but meant that many early reviews lacked depth. Rather than finding the writing style disappointing, he felt it had matured and improved. He acknowledged that the subject matter of the books had become more adult, and that Rowling had clearly been writing with the adult audience firmly in mind since the middle of the series. He compared the works in this respect to Huckleberry Finn and Alice in Wonderland which achieved success and have become established classics, in part by appealing to the adult audience as well as children.[76]Sales for Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows were record setting. The initial U.S. print run for Deathly Hallows was 12million copies, and more than a million were pre-ordered through Amazon.com and Barnes & Noble,[77] 500percent higher than pre-sales had been for Half-Blood Prince.[78] On 12April2007, Barnes & Noble declared that Deathly Hallows had broken its pre-order record, with more than 500,000 copies pre-ordered through its site.[79] On opening day, a record 8.3million copies were sold in the United States (over 96 per second),[80][81] and 2.65million copies in the United Kingdom.[82] It holds the Guinness World record for fastest selling book of fiction in 24 hours for U.S. sales.[83] At WH Smith, sales reportedly reached a rate of 15 books sold per second.[84] By June2008, nearly a year after it was published, worldwide sales were reportedly around 44million.[1]Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows has won several awards.[85] In 2007, the book was named one of The New York Times 100 Notable Books,[86] and one of its Notable Children's Books.[87] The novel was named the best book of 2007, by Newsweek's critic Malcolm Jones.[88] Publishers Weekly also listed Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows among their Best Books of 2007.[89] In 2008, the American Library Association named the novel one of its Best Books for Young Adults,[90] and also listed it as a Notable Children's Book.[91] Furthermore, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows received the 2008 Colorado Blue Spruce Book Award.[85]Due to Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows' worldwide fame, it has been translated into many languages. The first translation to be released was the Ukrainian translation, on 25September2007 (as     ).[92] The Swedish title of the book was revealed by Rowling as Harry Potter and the Relics of Death (Harry Potter och Ddsrelikerna), following a pre-release question from the Swedish publisher about the difficulty of translating the two words "Deathly Hallows" without having read the book.[93] This is also the title used for the French translation (Harry Potter et les reliques de la mort), the Spanish translation (Harry Potter y las Reliquias de la Muerte), the Dutch translation (Harry Potter en de Relieken van de Dood) and the Brazilian Portuguese translation (Harry Potter e as Relquias da Morte).[94] The first Polish translation was released with a new title: Harry Potter i Insygnia mierci Harry Potter and the Insignia of Death.[95] The Hindi translation Harry Potter aur Maut ke Tohfe (     ), which means "Harry Potter and the Gifts of Death", was released by Manjul Publication in India on 27June2008.[96]Deathly Hallows was released in hardcover on 21July2007,[97] and in paperback in the United Kingdom on 10July2008,[98] and in the United States on 7July2009.[99] In SoHo, New York, there was a release party for the American paperback edition, with many games and activities.[100] An "Adult Edition" with a different cover illustration was released by Bloomsbury on 21July2007.[101] To be released simultaneously with the original U.S. hardcover on 21July with only 100,000 copies was a Scholastic deluxe edition, highlighting a new cover illustration by Mary GrandPr.[102] In October2010, Bloomsbury released a "Celebratory" paperback edition, which featured a foiled and starred cover.[103] Lastly, on 1November2010, a "Signature" edition of the novel was released in paperback by Bloomsbury.[104]A two-part film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows is directed by David Yates, written by Steve Kloves and produced by David Heyman, David Barron and J. K. Rowling. Part 1 was released on 19November2010, and Part 2 on 15July2011.[105][106] Filming began in February2009, and ended on 12June2010.[107] However, the cast confirmed they would reshoot the epilogue scene as they only had two days to shoot the original.[108] Reshoots officially ended around December 2010.[note 1][109] Part 1 ended at Chapter 24 of the book, when Voldemort regained the Elder Wand.[110] However, there were a few omissions, such as the appearances of Dean Thomas and Viktor Krum, and Peter Pettigrew's death.[111] James Bernadelli of Reelviews said that the script stuck closest to the text since Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets,[112] yet this was met with negativity from some audiences as the film inherited "the book's own problems".[113]Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows was released simultaneously on 21 July 2007, in both the UK and the United States.[114][115] The UK edition features the voice of Stephen Fry and runs about 24 hours[116] while the U.S. edition features the voice of Jim Dale and runs about 21 hours.[117] Both Fry and Dale recorded 146 different and distinguishable character voices, and was the most recorded by an individual on an audiobook at the time.[118]For his work on Deathly Hallows, Dale won the 2008 Grammy Award for the Best Spoken Word Album for Children.[119] He also was awarded an Earphone Award by AudioFile, who claimed, "Dale has raised the bar on audiobook interpretation so high it's hard to imagine any narrator vaulting over it."[120]On 4 December 2008, Rowling released The Tales of Beedle the Bard both in the UK and US.[121] The Tales of Beedle the Bard is a spin-off of Deathly Hallows and contains fairy tales that are told to children in the "Wizarding World". The book includes five short stories, including "The Tale of the Three Brothers" which is the story of the Deathly Hallows.Amazon.com released an exclusive collector's edition of the book which is a replica of the book that Amazon.com purchased at auction in December 2007.[122] Seven copies were auctioned off in London by Sothebys. Each was illustrated and handwritten by Rowling and is 157 pages. It was bound in brown Moroccan leather and embellished with five hand-chased hallmarked sterling silver ornaments and mounted moonstones.[123] 1 Contents

1.1 Plot introduction
1.2 Plot summary
1.3 Epilogue

1.1 Plot introduction1.2 Plot summary1.3 Epilogue2 Background

2.1 Franchise
2.2 Choice of title
2.3 Rowling on finishing the book

2.1 Franchise2.2 Choice of title2.3 Rowling on finishing the book3 Major themes

3.1 Death
3.2 Living in a corrupted society
3.3 Christian allegories

3.1 Death3.2 Living in a corrupted society3.3 Christian allegories4 Release

4.1 Marketing and promotion
4.2 Spoiler embargo
4.3 Online leaks and early delivery
4.4 Price wars and other controversies

4.1 Marketing and promotion4.2 Spoiler embargo4.3 Online leaks and early delivery4.4 Price wars and other controversies5 Publication and reception

5.1 Critical response
5.2 Sales, awards and honours

5.1 Critical response5.2 Sales, awards and honours6 Translations7 Editions8 Adaptations

8.1 Film
8.2 Audiobooks

8.1 Film8.2 Audiobooks9 The Tales of Beedle the Bard10 Notes11 References12 Bibliography13 External links1.1 Plot introduction1.2 Plot summary1.3 Epilogue2.1 Franchise2.2 Choice of title2.3 Rowling on finishing the book3.1 Death3.2 Living in a corrupted society3.3 Christian allegories4.1 Marketing and promotion4.2 Spoiler embargo4.3 Online leaks and early delivery4.4 Price wars and other controversies5.1 Critical response5.2 Sales, awards and honours8.1 Film8.2 Audiobooks"The Tales of Beedle the Bard, Standard Edition (Harry Potter) (9780545128285): J.K. Rowling: Books". Amazon.com. http://www.amazon.com/Tales-Beedle-Standard-Edition-Potter/dp/0545128285/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1335223887&sr=1-1. Retrieved 23 April 2012."The Tales of Beedle the Bard, Standard Edition: Amazon.co.uk: J.K. Rowling: Books". Amazon.co.uk. http://www.amazon.co.uk/Tales-Beedle-Bard-Standard-Edition/dp/0747599874/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1335223949&sr=1-1. Retrieved 23 April 2012.Granger, John. The Deathly Hallows Lectures: The Hogwarts Professor Explains the Final Harry Potter Adventure. Zossima Press: 2008. ISBN 0-9723221-7-5.Hall, Susan. Reading Harry Potter: critical essays. Greenwood Publishing: 2003. ISBN 0-313-32067-5.Rowling, JK. Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. London: Bloomsbury/New York City: Scholastic: 2005. UK ISBN 0-747-58108-8/U.S. ISBN 0-439-78454-9.Rowling, JK. Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. London: Bloomsbury/New York City: Scholastic: 2000. UK ISBN 0-747-54624-X/U.S. ISBN 0-439-13959-7.Shapiro, Marc. J. K. Rowling: The Wizard Behind Harry Potter. St. Martin's Press: 2007. ISBN 0-312-37697-9.Heckl, Raik. "The Tale of the Three Brothers" and the Idea of the Speaking Dead in the Harry Potter Novels. Leipzig: 2008.Book: Harry PotterHarry Potter at Bloomsbury.com web site UK publisher book informationHarry Potter at Scholastic.com web site U.S. publisher book informationHarry Potter at Allen & Unwin web site Australia-New Zealand publisher book informationThe Pendragon Adventure is a young adult series of science fiction/fantasy novels by D. J. MacHale. They follow the chronicles of Bobby Pendragon, an American teenager who discovers that he, as well as his two best friends, Mark Dimond and Courtney Chetwynde, must prevent the destruction of their own world as well as others.The series has ten books: The Merchant of Death, The Lost City of Faar, The Never War, The Reality Bug , Black Water, The Rivers of Zadaa, The Quillan Games, The Pilgrims of Rayne, Raven Rise, and The Soldiers of Halla. Bobby Pendragon recounts the events of his adventure in journals sent to his loyal friends and a third-person narrative is used to tell the stories of other characters. Each book of the series repeatedly alternates between the two narrative techniques.The first five books in the series, The Merchant of Death (2002), The Lost City of Faar (2003), The Never War (2003), The Reality Bug (2003), and Black Water (2004) were originally published in paperback by Aladdin Paperbacks. The remaining five books, The Rivers of Zadaa (2005), The Quillian Games (2006), The Pilgrims of Rayne (2007), Raven Rise (2008), and The Soldiers of Halla (2009) were all originally published in hardback by Simon and Schuster. As of 2011, all books have been released in both formats.On his official site, MacHale stated that he had finished the first draft of the last book, and said it would be a "killer finale." It was released on May 12, 2009. He also announced that the first graphic novel based on the Pendragon series would be released around the time of the ninth book, and that a short series of books meant to be companions to the series will be released, with the release of the first companion book scheduled for before the release of book ten. This short series has since been released as a trilogy, written by other authors, called Pendragon: Before the War.Robert "Bobby" Pendragon, an everyday athletic junior high school student from Stony Brook, Connecticut discovers that he is a Traveler: someone who is able to use mystical flumes to journey among ten distinct spacetime realities, called "territories." His Uncle Press, the lead Traveler, tells him that they have a crucial mission: to stop the efforts of the shapeshifting demon Saint Dane, a supporter of the darker side of human nature who believes that everything there is or was, collectively called Halla, must be destroyed so that he may rebuild it, according to his own designs. As each territory reaches a critical turning point, Saint Dane arrives, hoping to lead its people toward self-destruction. Bobby travels to the ten territories to thwart Saint Dane's plans, sending journals to his home (Second Earth) to be received by his best friends Mark Dimond and Courtney Chetwynde, who become sometimes involved with the action and are deemed Bobby's "acolytes." There is one Traveler from each territory and Bobby soon realizes that his role is to replace his uncle as the lead Traveler, pursuing Saint Dane across Halla, and helping to guide the territories back toward stability with the assistance of the other Travelers, their acolytes, and further allies. The turning points of the territories, in order, occur on Denduron, Cloral, First Earth, Veelox, Eelong, Zadaa, Quillan, Ibara, Second Earth, and Third Earth. Not only does Bobby come up against the forces of Saint Dane, but he also learns the skills of martial arts and how to respect the diverse peoples of the territories he encounters, which wildly differ in their social structures, technologies, philosophies, traditions, and other cultural aspects. He also has to adapt to each territory's environments to get to Saint Dane. As the saga progresses, Bobby begins to learn the nature of what it really means to be a Traveler, that Saint Dane's ultimate goal includes a mysterious event called "the Convergence," and how different he actually is from a normal American teenager. By the ninth book, Bobby successfully prevents the destruction of six territories, but on Second Earth, Veelox, and Quillan the Travelers fail, allowing Saint Dane to claim victory. Even worse, by taking over Second Earth, Saint Dane manages to reverse all previous Traveler victories, founding an elitist, genocidal cult called Ravinia that marches its robot army of humanoid soldiers freely throughout the territories. In the last book, Bobby and the Travelers learn that they are not actually humans, but rather, spirits created by Solara, the source of all accumulated human knowledge. Reuniting one last time, they manage to defeat Saint Dane in a final battle on Third Earth, thus reviving Halla and beginning its process toward recovery.This is a list of all ten of the territories where all of the books are set. Also listed is the names of the Travelers from each territory and their acolytes.Although all of the territories were considered "won" at the end of Soldiers of Halla, this is a list of the current status of the territories in the battle for Halla, as of Raven Rise. An * indicates a reversal of fortune in the last two novels (that is, that the territory in question experienced two turning points, the first of which was a Traveler victory and the second of which was a loss).Ravinia is the group of superiors that Saint Dane formed. The purpose of Ravinia was to give the "chosen" an advantageous life. These "chosen" were the more advanced people. Some examples include the Rokador on Zadaa and the Klees on Eelong. In the end, as mentioned, all the territories are said to be brought back to the natural and correct course. Ravinia failed because the Ravinians realized that Saint Dane really was pure evil and they disagreed on his methods to making Halla better. This caused Saint Dane to lose his evil spirit of solara and became his down fall.Quigs are creatures (not necessarily with life, they can be mechanical) that were made by Saint Dane to guard the flumes. The quigs are different in each world. However, they all hate high-pitched sounds, such as whistles,and all have yellow eyes. -Denduron: Bears -Cloral: Sharks -First Earth:??? -Veelox:??? -Eelong: Gars -Zadaa: Snakes -Quillian: Giant Spiders -Ibara: Bees -Second Earth: Dogs -Third Earth: Dogs1 Synopsis2 List of Territories and their Travelers

2.1 Ravinia
2.2 Quigs

2.1 Ravinia2.2 Quigs3 References4 External links2.1 Ravinia2.2 QuigsDenduron - Traveler victory/loss*(They discover the tak again) - Traveler: Alder - Acolyte: Milago Widow (Name unknown)Cloral - Traveler victory - Traveler: Vo Spader - Acolyte: Wu YenzaFirst Earth - Traveler victory - Traveler: Vincent "Gunny" Van Dyke - Acolyte: Douglas "Dodger" CurtisSecond Earth - Traveler loss - Traveler: Bobby Pendragon - Acolytes: Courtney Chetwynde and Mark DimondThird Earth - Traveler victory - Traveler: Patrick Mac - Acolyte: Jay Oh (Patrick's student)Veelox - Traveler loss - Traveler: Aja Killian - Acolyte: Evangeline (Surname unknown)Eelong - Traveler victory/loss*(The flume gets destroyed/Eelong's traveler dies,rendering it cut off from the other territories) - Traveler: Kasha - Acolyte: BoonZadaa - Traveler victory - Traveler: Loor - Acolyte: SaangiQuillan - Traveler loss - Traveler: Elli Winter (formerly Nevva Winter) - Acolyte: NoneIbara - Traveler victory/loss*(Saint Dane attacks again with more dados) - Traveler: Siry Remudi (formerly Jen Remudi) - Acolyte: Loque (Surname unknown)Official websiteAn interview with D.J. MacHaleA more up-to-date interview with D.J.The Equilibrium, the largest extant fan forumMovie Forum, most relevant forum site remainingElayne Trakand is one of the main characters of the Wheel of Time fantasy series by Robert Jordan. She bears a resemblance both in name and appearance to Ilyena, the doomed wife of Lews Therin Telamon from the Age of Legends.She is described as exceedingly beautiful, about 5'7", with blue eyes and red-gold hair framing an oval face.The youngest child and only daughter of Queen Morgase Trakand of Andor, Elayne grew up in the Royal Palace in Caemlyn. She was heir apparent throughout her childhood as only women can hold the Lion Throne of Andor. She is thus known as the Daughter-Heir of Andor and since the Knife of Dreams, is the Queen of Andor. Her personal sigil is a golden lily.Elayne's first appearance in the series, in The Eye of The World, is when Rand al'Thor literally falls into the Royal Garden and makes acquaintances with Elayne, her older brother Gawyn Trakand and their half-brother Galad Damodred, and even Queen Morgase herself. Later in the series, it is revealed that Elayne fell in love with Rand at first sight. However, she was unable to follow Rand both due to her royal duties and because, as a daughter of House Trakand, she was required by tradition to train at the White Tower, though she was the only daughter heir in Andor history to have had true strength in the One Power. She is currently the first Aes Sedai queen of any country since the last queen of Manetheren died.Elayne is the first heir of House Trakand in a thousand years to actually be able to channel the One Power with enough strength to become Aes Sedai; she is about as strong as her friends Aviendha and Egwene al'Vere. While at the Tower, she befriended some folk who, by coincidence, knew Rand quite well: his (former) childhood sweetheart Egwene al'Vere, and his village's Wisdom, Nynaeve al'Meara. She also got to know Min Farshaw, a young woman who had met Rand and was in the Tower for "safekeeping" at the time.She went to Falme (having been tricked into going there by Aes Sedai of the Black Ajah) and then to Tear, where she was sent along with Nynaeve and Egwene to hunt the Black Ajah by then-Amyrlin Siuan Sanche, and was present when Rand drew Callandor and proclaimed himself the Dragon Reborn.At this point, Elayne finally got her chance to express her feelings for Rand when Egwene renounced him; the two had worked it out in advance, though Elayne's part of the conversation did not go quite according to plan. Unfortunately, their time was limited, soon Rand and Egwene went to Rhuidean and Elayne and Nynaeve to Tarabon. They traveled by way of a Sea Folk ship, reputedly the fastest ships available, and Elayne quickly discovered that Sea Folk Windfinders can channel. Elayne promised to keep this secret, as the Sea Folk fear Aes Sedai meddling. Sent by Lan and Rand to look after the two were Juilin Sandar and Thom, whom Elayne eventually recognized from dusty childhood memories as her mother's former lover. She has come to see Thom as a surrogate father, a role he gladly accepts.In Tarabon they were instrumental in routing the Black Ajah and returning the Panarch Amathera to her office. On the way to Salidar, a bizarre series of events led to Birgitte Silverbow, one of the Heroes of the Horn, being ripped from Tel'aran'rhiod and expelled into the waking world to die. To save her, Elayne bonded Birgitte as her Warder, and the famed archer has been a constant companion since. The Warder bond between the two women is not the same as the Bond between an Aes Sedai and a male Warder. Many believe that it is because both of them are women, a bonding that has never happened before and is under much scrutiny. The group arrived in Salidar just in time to receive the brand new Amyrlin Seat, Egwene al'Vere. Egwene made Elayne and Nynaeve full Aes Sedai upon her ascension. Elayne went with Nynaeve, Aviendha and Mat Cauthon to Ebou Dar and after using the Bowl of the Winds to break the endless summer caused by the Dark one, shepherded a large group of channelers, known as the Kin, to Caemlyn when the Seanchan invaded. When she returned to Caemlyn she declared for the throne of Andor following her mother's absence and supposed death (Morgase abdicated the throne in her exile, making Elayne the legal Queen). She secured the Throne of Andor following a Succession war which included her opponents besieging Caemlyn. She has also rediscovered the ability to create ter'angreal. For a short time, she also used Mat as an unwilling tutor in cursing and swearing.Elayne is one of three women who love Rand al'Thor, and is close friends with the other two (Aviendha and Min); the three have agreed to share him, and recently Bonded him as their mutual Warder, partly for the side effect of being able to tell what the other person is feeling. Shortly after that, she and Rand found some time together alone in a room with a bed, almost immediately demonstrating one of the downsides of the Warder bond and leading Birgitte, Min and Aviendha to get blindingly drunk as soon as possible. According to Min's visions, Elayne has conceived Rand's fraternal twins, a son and daughter, who will come out "just fine". Because Min's visions are supposedly always true, Elayne believes, whether correctly or not, that she can come to no harm whilst she is pregnant and has not flinched from danger since.It is not known if Elayne is a reincarnation of Ilyena Therin Moerelle, but there have been some hints to that effect, particularly in their similar physical appearance and first names. However, known examples of reincarnation do not show a continuity in names or physical characteristics: two of Birgitte's incarnations are named Teadra and Maerion, and the only similarity between Rand and Lews Therin Telamon is height, all else being completely different. Having said that, some personality traits are known to carry over between reincarnations: Birgitte is always an archer and always linked to Gaidal Cain, while Lews Therin was noted for his stubbornness and nobility.Elayne is among the most powerful female channelers of the past thousand years, with fewer than ten living non-Forsaken women besting her raw strength. She has also demonstrated an immense degree of talent in the copying and creation of ter'angreal. She has successfully made copies of the twisted ring ter'angreal that Egwene obtained from Verin Sedai, a'dam, and several other objects. While recreating the a'dam she also modified the design without a leash between the collar and bracelet, which is unnecessary for maintaining the forced link. She has also made some original ter'angreal, including one which makes the user invisible and was able to re-create Mat Cauthon's foxhead medallion which repels the use of the one power, although the copies currently do not work quite as well. She has expressed interest in learning how to make angreal or sa'angreal, but as of late her studies have taken a back seat to her political campaign and pregnancy.1 Description2 Life as Royalty3 To the White Tower4 Out of the Tower5 Rand's Lovers6 Skills and abilitiesGeorge Raymond Richard Martin[1] (born September 20, 1948), sometimes referred to as GRRM,[2] is an American screenwriter and author of fantasy, horror, and science fiction. He is best known for A Song of Ice and Fire, his bestselling series of epic fantasy novels that HBO adapted for their dramatic pay-cable series Game of Thrones. Martin was selected by Time magazine as one of the "2011 Time 100", a list of the "most influential people in the world".[3][4]George R. R. Martin was born on September 20, 1948, in Bayonne, New Jersey,[5] the son of longshoreman Raymond Collins Martin and his wife Margaret Brady Martin who also had two daughters, sisters Darleen and Janet. The family lived in a federal housing project near to the Bayonne docks. Being poor the young Martin lived in his imagination and began writing and selling monster stories for pennies to other neighborhood children, dramatic readings included. He also wrote stories about a mythical kingdom populated by his pet turtles; the turtles died frequently in their toy castle, so he finally decided they were killing off each other in "sinister plots."[6] Martin attended Mary Jane Donohoe School and then later Marist High School. While there he became an avid comic book fan, developing a strong interest in the innovative superheroes being published by Marvel Comics.[7] Fantastic Four No. 20 (Nov 1963) printed a letter Martin wrote to the editor, the first of many. Other fans wrote him letters, and through such contacts Martin joined the fledgling comics fandom of the era, writing fiction for various fanzines.[8] In 1965 Martin won comic fandom's Alley Award for his prose superhero story "Powerman vs. The Blue Barrier", the first of many awards he would go on to win.In 1970 Martin earned a B. S. in Journalism from Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, graduating summa cum laude; he went on to complete his M. S. in Journalism in 1971, also from Northwestern. Eligible for the draft during the Vietnam War, to which he objected, Martin applied for and obtained conscientious objector status;[9] he instead did alternative service work for two years (1972-1974) as a VISTA volunteer, attached to the Cook County Legal Assistance Foundation. He also directed chess tournaments for the Continental Chess Association from 1973-1976. Then from 1976-1978 he was a journalism instructor at Clark College in Dubuque, IA, becoming Writer In Residence at the college from 1978-1979.Martin began selling his science-fiction short stories in 1971, his first story selling to Galaxy magazine. His first story nominated for the Hugo Award[10] and the Nebula Award was With Morning Comes Mistfall, published in 1973 by Analog magazine. A member of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA), Martin became the organization's Southwest Regional Director from 1977-1979; from 1996-1998 he served as its Vice President.In 1976, for Kansas City's MidAmeriCon, the 34th World Science Fiction Convention (Worldcon), Martin and his friend and fellow writer-editor Gardner Dozois conceived of and organized the first Hugo Losers Party for the benefit of all past and present Hugo-losing writers, their friends, and family the evening following the convention's Hugo Awards ceremony. Martin was nominated for two Hugos that year but ultimately wound up losing both awards, for the novelette "...and Seven Times Never Kill Man" and the novella "The Storms of Windhaven", co-written with Lisa Tuttle.[11] The Hugo Losers Party became an annual Worldcon event thereafter, its formal title eventually evolving into something a little more politically correct as both its size and prestige grew.Although much of his work is fantasy or horror, a number of his earlier works are science fiction occurring in a loosely defined future history, known informally as 'The Thousand Worlds' or 'The manrealm'. He has also written at least one piece of political-military fiction, "Night of the Vampyres", collected in Harry Turtledove's anthology The Best Military Science Fiction of the 20th century.[12]The unexpected commercial failure of Martin's fourth book, The Armageddon Rag (1983), "essentially destroyed my career as a novelist at the time", he recalled. It began his career in television, however,[6] as a result of a Hollywood option on that novel that got him hired first as a staff writer and then as an Executive Story Consultant for a revival of the Twilight Zone. When the CBS series ran its course, Martin then became a producer on the dramatic fantasy series Beauty and the Beast. In 1989 he became the show's co-supervising producer. During this same period, he also worked in print media as a book series editor, overseeing the development of the lengthy Wild Cards series, which takes place in a shared universe in which a small slice of post-World War II humanity gains superpowers after the release of an alien-engineered virus. In Second Person Martin "gives a personal account of the close-knit role-playing game (RPG) culture that gave rise to his Wild Cards shared-world anthologies".[13] Martin's own contributions to the multiple-author series often feature Thomas Tudbury, "The Great and Powerful Turtle", a powerful psychokinetic whose flying "shell" consisted of an armored VW Beetle. Twenty-one volumes had been published in the series as of June 2011. Earlier that year, Martin signed the contract for the twenty-second Wild Cards volume, to be called Low Ball when published by Tor Books.Martin's novella, Nightflyers, was adapted into a 1987 feature film of the same title; he was not happy about having to cut plot elements for the screenplay's scenario in order to a accommodate the film's small budget.[14]In his spare time, Martin collects medieval-themed miniatures, reading, and collecting science fiction, fantasy, and horror books, and treasuring his comics collection, which includes the first issues of Marvel's "silver age" Spider-Man and Fantastic Four.In 1991, Martin briefly returned to writing novels and began what would eventually turn into his epic fantasy series A Song of Ice and Fire (reportedly inspired by the Wars of the Roses and Ivanhoe), which will run to at least seven volumes. The first volume A Game of Thrones was published in 1996. In November 2005, A Feast for Crows, the fourth book in this series, became The New York Times No. 1 Bestseller and also achieved No. 1 ranking on The Wall Street Journal bestseller list. In addition, in September 2006, A Feast for Crows was nominated for both a Quill Award and the British Fantasy Award.[15] The fifth book, A Dance with Dragons, was published in July 2011, quickly becoming a huge international bestseller, including a No. 1 ranking on the New York Times Bestseller list and many others; it remained on the NY Times bestseller list for more than a year. The series has received critical praise from authors, readers, and critics alike. In 2012 A Dance With Dragons made the final ballot for science fiction and fantasy's Hugo Award, World Fantasy Award, Locus Poll Award, and the British Fantasy Award; the novel went on to win the Locus Poll Award for Best Fantasy Novel.During completion of A Dance With Dragons and other projects, George R. R. Martin was also heavily involved in the production of a television series adaptation of the A Song of Ice and Fire books named after the first book, A Game of Thrones. Martin's involvement included the selection of a production team and participation in scriptwriting; he is listed in the opening credits as an executive producer of the series.HBO Productions purchased the television rights for the entire A Song of Ice and Fire series in 2007. Game of Thrones (the series title) began airing the fantasy series on their U.S. premium cable channel April 17, 2011; it ran weekly for ten episodes, each approximately an hour long.[16] The series was renewed shortly after the first episode aired. The first season was nominated for 13 Emmy Awards, ultimately winning two, one for its opening title credits and for Peter Dinklage as Best Supporting Actor. The second season of ten episodes, based on the second Ice and Fire novel A Clash of Kings, began airing on HBO in the U.S. April 1, 2012; the second season was nominated for twelve Emmy Awards, including another Supporting Actor nomination for Dinklage. It went on to win six of those Emmys in the Technical Arts categories, which were awarded the week before the regular televised 2012 awards show. The first season of 10 episodes was also nominated for a 2012 Hugo Award, fantasy and science fiction's oldest award, presented by the World Science Fiction Society each year at the annual worldcon; it went on to win the 2012 Hugo for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form, at Chicon 7, the 70th World Science Fiction Convention.Martin's work has been described by the Los Angeles Times as having "complex story lines, fascinating characters, great dialogue, perfect pacing",[17] while the New York Times sees it as "fantasy for grown ups",[18] others feel it is dark and cynical.[19] His first novel, Dying of the Light, set the tone for some of his future work; it unfolds on a mostly abandoned planet that is slowly becoming uninhabitable as it moves away from its sun. This story has a strong sense of melancholy. His characters are often unhappy or, at least, unsatisfied  holding on to idealisms in a ruthless world. Many have elements of tragic heroes in them. Reviewer T. M. Wagner writes, "Let it never be said Martin doesn't share Shakespeare's fondness for the senselessly tragic."[20] This gloominess can be an obstacle for some readers. The Inchoatus Group writes, "If this absence of joy is going to trouble you, or youre looking for something more affirming, then you should probably seek elsewhere."[21]Martin's characters are multi-facetedeach with surprisingly intricate pasts, aspirations, and ambitions. Publishers Weekly writes of his ongoing epic fantasy A Song of Ice and Fire, "The complexity of characters such as Daenerys, Arya and the Kingslayer will keep readers turning even the vast number of pages contained in this volume, for the author, like Tolkien or Jordan, makes us care about their fates."[22] No one is given an unrealistic string of luck, however; so misfortune, injury, and death (and even false death) can befall any character, major or minor, no matter how attached the reader has become. Martin has described his penchant for killing off important characters as being necessary for the story's depth: "...when my characters are in danger, I want you to be afraid to turn the page, (so) you need to show right from the beginning that you're playing for keeps."Major themes and areas of exploration in his short fiction include loneliness, connection, tragically doomed love, idealism, romanticism, and hard truth versus comforting deceit. Many of these occur in his magnum opus as well, but most of them are more abundant and obvious in his shorter works.Martin is known for his regular attendance through the decades at science fiction conventions and comics conventions and his accessibility to fans. In early 1980s, critic and writer Thomas Disch identified Martin as a member of the "Labor Day Group", writers who regularly congregated at the annual Worldcon,[23] usually held on or around the Labor Day weekend. Since 1986 Martin has participated annually in Albuquerque's smaller regional convention Bubonicon near his home in New Mexico.[24]Martin's official fan club is the "Brotherhood Without Banners," who have a regular posting board at the Forum of the large website, westeros.org, which is focused on his Song of Ice and Fire fantasy series. At the annual World Science Fiction Convention every year, the BWB hosts a large, on-going hospitality suite that is open to all members of the Worldcon;[25] their suite frequently wins by popular vote the convention's best party award.[citation needed]Martin has been criticized by some readers for the delays between books in the Ice and Fire series, notably the six-year gap between the fourth volume, A Feast for Crows (2005), and the fifth volume, A Dance with Dragons (2011).[26][27] In 2010, Martin responded to these concerns, saying he was unwilling to write his Ice and Fire series exclusively, saying that other writing and editing different projects has always been part of his working process.[28]Martin is strongly opposed to fan fiction, believing it to be copyright infringement and a bad exercise for aspiring writers.[29][30]In the early 1970s Martin was in a relationship with fellow science-fiction/fantasy author Lisa Tuttle,[31] with whom he co-wrote Windhaven.While attending an east coast science fiction convention he met his first wife Gale Burnick; they were married in 1975, but the marriage ended in divorce, without children, in 1979.On February 15, 2011, Martin married his longtime paramour Parris McBride during a small ceremony at their Santa Fe, New Mexico, home; the couple exchanged custom made, Celtic-inspired wedding rings made for them by local artisans. Area friends were in attendance and helped them celebrate the occasion.[32] On August 19, 2011, they held a larger wedding ceremony and reception at Renovation, the 69th World Science Fiction Convention, in Reno, Nevada for their larger circle of friends within the fantasy and science fiction fields.[33]Martin maintains a LiveJournal account called "Not A Blog" where he posts about his works and various unrelated topics such as politics and the NFL: he is a lifelong supporter of the Democratic Party and claimed Jimmy Carter, during an interview with Authors@Google, to be "clearly the best human being to be president during my lifetime". He has recently expressed admiration for Barack Obama and strongly condemned perceived attempts at voter suppression, likening it to the behavior of Democrats of the Solid South and citing the pro-voting rights Republicans of his youth as a far better rolemodel for the conservative movement, citing youthful admiration for specifically Everett Dirksen, Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., Clifford Case and William Scranton.[34] Martin is an avid, lifelong fan of both the New York Jets and New York Giants. His LJ "Not a Blog" posts have been reposted at times by someone else to a George R. R. Martin Facebook page, but Martin has never been a member of that online community or a reader of its posts; he also does not use Twitter.He and his wife Parris are animal activists and supporters of the Wild Spirit Wolf Sanctuary in New Mexico.[35] Martin has noted his admiration for wolves not only in his books but also through fundraising.[36][37]Robert A. Heinlein, F. Scott Fitzgerald, H. P. Lovecraft, Robert E. Howard, Stan Lee, William Faulkner, Roger Zelazny, Bernard Cornwell, Jack Vance, J. R. R. Tolkien, George MacDonald FraserDaniel Abraham, Scott Lynch, David Anthony Durham1 Biography

1.1 A Song of Ice and Fire
1.2 HBO series production

1.1 A Song of Ice and Fire1.2 HBO series production2 Themes3 Relationship with fans4 Personal life5 Bibliography

5.1 Author

5.1.1 Novels
5.1.2 Children's novel
5.1.3 Selected novelettes
5.1.4 Collections
5.1.5 Television


5.2 Editor

5.2.1 Wild Cards series editor (also contributor to many volumes)
5.2.2 Cross-genre anthologies edited (with Gardner Dozois)



5.1 Author

5.1.1 Novels
5.1.2 Children's novel
5.1.3 Selected novelettes
5.1.4 Collections
5.1.5 Television

5.1.1 Novels5.1.2 Children's novel5.1.3 Selected novelettes5.1.4 Collections5.1.5 Television5.2 Editor

5.2.1 Wild Cards series editor (also contributor to many volumes)
5.2.2 Cross-genre anthologies edited (with Gardner Dozois)

5.2.1 Wild Cards series editor (also contributor to many volumes)5.2.2 Cross-genre anthologies edited (with Gardner Dozois)6 Awards7 References8 External links1.1 A Song of Ice and Fire1.2 HBO series production5.1 Author

5.1.1 Novels
5.1.2 Children's novel
5.1.3 Selected novelettes
5.1.4 Collections
5.1.5 Television

5.1.1 Novels5.1.2 Children's novel5.1.3 Selected novelettes5.1.4 Collections5.1.5 Television5.2 Editor

5.2.1 Wild Cards series editor (also contributor to many volumes)
5.2.2 Cross-genre anthologies edited (with Gardner Dozois)

5.2.1 Wild Cards series editor (also contributor to many volumes)5.2.2 Cross-genre anthologies edited (with Gardner Dozois)5.1.1 Novels5.1.2 Children's novel5.1.3 Selected novelettes5.1.4 Collections5.1.5 Television5.2.1 Wild Cards series editor (also contributor to many volumes)5.2.2 Cross-genre anthologies edited (with Gardner Dozois)Dying of the Light (1977)  Hugo Award nominee, 1978;[38] British Fantasy Award nominee, 1979[39]Windhaven (1981, with Lisa Tuttle)  Locus Poll Award nominee, 1982[11]Fevre Dream (1982)  Locus SF[11] and World Fantasy Award nominee, 1983[40]The Armageddon Rag (1983)  Locus Poll Award, Best SF Novel winner[11] and World Fantasy Award nominee, 1984[40]Tuf Voyaging (1986, a fix-up novel collecting Martin's linked Haviland Tuf stories)Hunter's Run (2007, expanded version of the novella "Shadow Twin", with Gardner Dozois and Daniel Abraham)A Song of Ice and Fire series:

A Game of Thrones (1996)  Locus Poll Award, Best Fantasy Novel winner,[11] Nebula and World Fantasy Award nominee, 1997[40]
A Clash of Kings (1998)  Locus Poll Award, Best Fantasy Novel winner,[11] Nebula Award nominee, 1999[41]
A Storm of Swords (2000)  Locus Poll Award, Best Best Fantasy Novel winner,[11] Hugo[38] and Nebula Awards nominee, 2001[42]

Part 1 Steel and Snow (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)
Part 2 Blood and Gold (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)


A Feast for Crows (2005)  Hugo,[38] Locus Fantasy,[11] and British Fantasy Awards nominee, 2006[43]
A Dance with Dragons (2011)  Locus Poll nominee and winner; Hugo Award nominee[44]

Part 1 Dreams and Dust (UK Edition)
Part 2 After the Feast (UK Edition)


The Winds of Winter (forthcoming)
A Dream of Spring (forthcoming)

A Game of Thrones (1996)  Locus Poll Award, Best Fantasy Novel winner,[11] Nebula and World Fantasy Award nominee, 1997[40]A Clash of Kings (1998)  Locus Poll Award, Best Fantasy Novel winner,[11] Nebula Award nominee, 1999[41]A Storm of Swords (2000)  Locus Poll Award, Best Best Fantasy Novel winner,[11] Hugo[38] and Nebula Awards nominee, 2001[42]

Part 1 Steel and Snow (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)
Part 2 Blood and Gold (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)

Part 1 Steel and Snow (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)Part 2 Blood and Gold (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)A Feast for Crows (2005)  Hugo,[38] Locus Fantasy,[11] and British Fantasy Awards nominee, 2006[43]A Dance with Dragons (2011)  Locus Poll nominee and winner; Hugo Award nominee[44]

Part 1 Dreams and Dust (UK Edition)
Part 2 After the Feast (UK Edition)

Part 1 Dreams and Dust (UK Edition)Part 2 After the Feast (UK Edition)The Winds of Winter (forthcoming)A Dream of Spring (forthcoming)A Game of Thrones (1996)  Locus Poll Award, Best Fantasy Novel winner,[11] Nebula and World Fantasy Award nominee, 1997[40]A Clash of Kings (1998)  Locus Poll Award, Best Fantasy Novel winner,[11] Nebula Award nominee, 1999[41]A Storm of Swords (2000)  Locus Poll Award, Best Best Fantasy Novel winner,[11] Hugo[38] and Nebula Awards nominee, 2001[42]

Part 1 Steel and Snow (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)
Part 2 Blood and Gold (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)

Part 1 Steel and Snow (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)Part 2 Blood and Gold (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)A Feast for Crows (2005)  Hugo,[38] Locus Fantasy,[11] and British Fantasy Awards nominee, 2006[43]A Dance with Dragons (2011)  Locus Poll nominee and winner; Hugo Award nominee[44]

Part 1 Dreams and Dust (UK Edition)
Part 2 After the Feast (UK Edition)

Part 1 Dreams and Dust (UK Edition)Part 2 After the Feast (UK Edition)The Winds of Winter (forthcoming)A Dream of Spring (forthcoming)Part 1 Steel and Snow (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)Part 2 Blood and Gold (UK edition only; US edition published as a single volume)Part 1 Dreams and Dust (UK Edition)Part 2 After the Feast (UK Edition)The Ice Dragon"A Song for Lya", originally in Analog, June 1974."Night of the Vampyres", originally in 'Amazing, 1975,[45] re-published in The Best Military Science Fiction of the 20th century"The Skin Trade" (1989) from the three-author collection Dark Visions; optioned for film by Mike the Pike Productions[46]"Tales of Dunk and Egg" series  set in the world of A Song of Ice and Fire

"The Hedge Knight" (1998)
"The Sworn Sword" (2003)
"The Mystery Knight" (2010)
"The She-Wolves of Winterfell/The Wolf Women of Winterfell" (working titles only; forthcoming)

"The Hedge Knight" (1998)"The Sworn Sword" (2003)"The Mystery Knight" (2010)"The She-Wolves of Winterfell/The Wolf Women of Winterfell" (working titles only; forthcoming)"Shadow Twin" (2004) with Gardner Dozois and Daniel AbrahamShadow Twin (2005) published in hardcover as an illustrated, signed, and numbered limited-edition from Subterranean PressSandkings, Hugo, Nebula awards winner.Meathouse Man, first published in 1976, in Orbit 18."The Hedge Knight" (1998)"The Sworn Sword" (2003)"The Mystery Knight" (2010)"The She-Wolves of Winterfell/The Wolf Women of Winterfell" (working titles only; forthcoming)A Song for Lya (1976)Songs of Stars and Shadows (1977)Sandkings (1981)Songs the Dead Men Sing (1983)Nightflyers (1985)Portraits of His Children (1987)Quartet (2001)GRRM: A RRetrospective (2003); reprinted in 2006 and 2007 in two volumes as DreamsongsThe Twilight Zone

The Last Defender of Camelot (1986)  writer (teleplay)
The Once and Future King (1986)  writer (teleplay), story editor
A Saucer of Loneliness (1986)  story editor
Lost and Found (1986)  writer (teleplay), from a published short story by Phyllis Eisenstein
The World Next Door (1989)  story editor
The Toys of Caliban (1986)  writer (teleplay), from an unpublished short story by Terry Matz
The Road Less Travelled (1986)  writer (story and teleplay), story editor

The Last Defender of Camelot (1986)  writer (teleplay)The Once and Future King (1986)  writer (teleplay), story editorA Saucer of Loneliness (1986)  story editorLost and Found (1986)  writer (teleplay), from a published short story by Phyllis EisensteinThe World Next Door (1989)  story editorThe Toys of Caliban (1986)  writer (teleplay), from an unpublished short story by Terry MatzThe Road Less Travelled (1986)  writer (story and teleplay), story editorBeauty and the Beast

Terrible Saviour (1987)  writer
Masques (1987)  writer
Shades of Grey (1988)  writer
Promises of Someday (1988)  writer
Fever (1988)  writer
Ozymandias (1988)  writer
Dead of Winter (1988)  writer
Brothers (1989)  writer
When the Blue Bird Sings' (1989)  writer (teleplay)
A Kingdom by the Sea (1989)  writer
What Rough Beast (1989)  writer (story)
Ceremony of Innocence (1989)  writer
Snow (1989)  writer
Beggar's Comet (1990)  writer
Invictus (1990)  writer

Terrible Saviour (1987)  writerMasques (1987)  writerShades of Grey (1988)  writerPromises of Someday (1988)  writerFever (1988)  writerOzymandias (1988)  writerDead of Winter (1988)  writerBrothers (1989)  writerWhen the Blue Bird Sings' (1989)  writer (teleplay)A Kingdom by the Sea (1989)  writerWhat Rough Beast (1989)  writer (story)Ceremony of Innocence (1989)  writerSnow (1989)  writerBeggar's Comet (1990)  writerInvictus (1990)  writerThe Outer Limits (1995 TV Series)

The Sandkings (1995) - writer (story)

The Sandkings (1995) - writer (story)Doorways (1993, unreleased pilot)  writer, producer, creator; (IDW Publishing issued the pilot's storyline as a graphic novel miniseries in 2010)[47]Game of Thrones

"The Pointy End"  writer (story, teleplay, 1st season)
"Blackwater"  writer (story, teleplay, 2nd season)
"Autumn Storms"  writer (story, teleplay, 3rd season)

"The Pointy End"  writer (story, teleplay, 1st season)"Blackwater"  writer (story, teleplay, 2nd season)"Autumn Storms"  writer (story, teleplay, 3rd season)The Last Defender of Camelot (1986)  writer (teleplay)The Once and Future King (1986)  writer (teleplay), story editorA Saucer of Loneliness (1986)  story editorLost and Found (1986)  writer (teleplay), from a published short story by Phyllis EisensteinThe World Next Door (1989)  story editorThe Toys of Caliban (1986)  writer (teleplay), from an unpublished short story by Terry MatzThe Road Less Travelled (1986)  writer (story and teleplay), story editorTerrible Saviour (1987)  writerMasques (1987)  writerShades of Grey (1988)  writerPromises of Someday (1988)  writerFever (1988)  writerOzymandias (1988)  writerDead of Winter (1988)  writerBrothers (1989)  writerWhen the Blue Bird Sings' (1989)  writer (teleplay)A Kingdom by the Sea (1989)  writerWhat Rough Beast (1989)  writer (story)Ceremony of Innocence (1989)  writerSnow (1989)  writerBeggar's Comet (1990)  writerInvictus (1990)  writerThe Sandkings (1995) - writer (story)"The Pointy End"  writer (story, teleplay, 1st season)"Blackwater"  writer (story, teleplay, 2nd season)"Autumn Storms"  writer (story, teleplay, 3rd season)New Voices in Science Fiction (1977: new stories by the John W. Campbell Award winners)New Voices in Science Fiction 2 (1979: more new stories by the John W. Campbell Award winners)New Voices in Science Fiction 3 (1980: more new stories by the John W. Campbell Award winners)New Voices in Science Fiction 4 (1981: more new stories by the John W. Campbell Award winners)The Science Fiction Weight Loss Book (1983) edited with Isaac Asimov and Martin H. Greenberg ("Stories by the great science fiction writers on fat, thin, and everything in between")The John W. Campbell Awards, Volume 5 (1984, continuation of the New Voices in Science Fiction series)Night Visions 3 (1986)Wild Cards (1987; contents expanded in 2010 edition with three new stories/authors)Wild Cards II: Aces High (1987)Wild Cards III: Jokers Wild (1987)Wild Cards IV: Aces Abroad (1988)Wild Cards V: Down & Dirty (1988)Wild Cards VI: Ace in the Hole (1990)Wild Cards VII: Dead Man's Hand (1990)Wild Cards VIII: One-Eyed Jacks (1991)Wild Cards IX: Jokertown Shuffle (1991)Wild Cards X: Double Solitaire (1992)Wild Cards XI: Dealer's Choice (1992)Wild Cards XII: Turn of the Cards (1993)Wild Cards: Card Sharks (1993; Book I of a New Cycle trilogy)Wild Cards: Marked Cards (1994; Book II of a New Cycle trilogy)Wild Cards: Black Trump (1995; Book III of a New Cycle trilogy)Wild Cards: Deuces Down (2002)Wild Cards: Death Draws Five (2006; solo novel by John J. Miller)Wild Cards: Inside Straight (2008; Book I of the Committee triad)Wild Cards: Busted Flush (2008; Book II of the Committee triad)Wild Cards: Suicide Kings (2009; Book III of the Committee triad)Wild Cards: Fort Freak (2011)Wild Cards: Lowball (forthcoming 2012; sequel to Fort Freak)Wild Cards: High Stakes (recently announced; forthcoming)[citation needed]Songs of the Dying Earth (2009; a tribute anthology to Jack Vances seminal Dying Earth series, first published by Subterranean Press)Warriors (2010; a massive, cross-genre anthology featuring stories about war and warriors; winner of the 2011 Locus Poll Award for Best Original Anthology)Songs of Love and Death (2010; a cross-genre anthology featuring stories of romance in fantasy and science fiction settings, originally entitled Star Crossed Lovers)Down These Strange Streets (2011; a cross-genre anthology that blends classic detective stories with fantasy and science fiction)Dangerous Women (forthcoming; a cross-genre anthology focusing on women warriors and strong female characters, originally titled Femmes Fatales)[48]Rogues (forthcoming; a cross-genre anthology featuring new stories about assorted rogues)[49]Old Mars (delivered and awaiting publication; an anthology featuring new, retro-themed Mars science fiction stories)[49]Old Venus (forthcoming; an anthology of new, retro-themed Venus science fiction stories)[49]"A Song for Lya" 1975 Hugo Award for Best Novella"Sandkings" 1980 Hugo Award for Best Novelette and Nebula Award for Best Novelette (the only one among Martin's stories to achieve that double)"The Way of Cross and Dragon" 1980 Hugo Award for Best Short Story"Portraits of His Children" 1986 Nebula Award for Best Novelette"The Pear-Shaped Man" 1988 Bram Stoker Award for Long Fiction"The Skin Trade" 1989 World Fantasy Award for Best Novella"Blood of the Dragon" 1997 Hugo Award for Best NovellaA Game of Thrones 2003 Premio Ignotus for Best Foreign NovelA Clash of Kings 2004 Premio Ignotus for Best Foreign NovelA Feast for Crows 2006 Quill Award; British Fantasy Award (nomination)A Storm of Swords 2003 Locus Poll Award for Best Fantasy Novel; 2006 Premio Ignotus for Best Foreign NovelWarriors (co-edited with Gardner Dozois) 2011 Locus Poll Award for Best Original AnthologyDeclared by Time Magazine "One of the Most Influential People of 2011"[3]A Dance With Dragons 2012 Locus Poll Award for Best Fantasy Novel2012 World Fantasy Award for Life AchievementOfficial websiteNot A Blog: George R. R. Martin's LivejournalGeorge R. R. Martin's PodcastGeorge R. R. Martin at the Internet Movie DatabaseGeorge R. R. Martin Complete BibliographyGeorge R. R. Martin at the Internet Book ListGeorge R. R. Martin at the Internet Speculative Fiction DatabaseWorks by or about George R. R. Martin in libraries (WorldCat catalog)Martin's awards and nominations at The Locus Index to Science Fiction Awards.Ender's Game is a series of comic book adaptations of science fiction novels written by Orson Scott Card published by Marvel Comics that began in October 2008. However, some have been all new content, not released before in novel format. The series, like the novels they are based on, are set in a future where mankind is facing annihilation by an aggressive alien society, an insect-like race known colloquially as "Buggers" but more formally as "Formics". The central character, Andrew "Ender" Wiggin, is one of the child soldiers trained at Battle School (and eventually Command School) to be the future leaders of the protection of Earth. The year is never specified, although the ages of the Wiggin children are specified to change throughout space, also carefully taking in the relativity of space and time.The series of comics are adaptations of the novels in the Ender Saga and are released under the banner "Actual Ender's Game". The series began publication in October 2008 with the first issue of Ender's Game: Battle School, with a set monthly release that followed. Both Ender's Game and Ender's Shadow stories were told spanning ten issues each, with two different sub-titles. Orson Scott Card's name has been attached to every issue released. Though he himself has not written any of the issues thus far, he does look over all that is published. [1]A five-part series based on Ender's Game. The first issue was released October 2008. There's a war coming. The same aliens who almost destroyed Earth once are coming back to get the whole job done this time. But we aren't going to just sit and die. The international military is taking our best and brightest to mold them into the finest military minds ever - and they're taking them young. 6-year-old Ender Wiggin is the best they've ever found. Can he save the Earth? Can he survive Battle School and the game that they will force him to play he loves to do it?[2]A five-part series based on Ender's Shadow. A mysterious orphan on the streets of Rotterdam, no bigger than a bean, will change the world. There's only one student at Battle School smarter than Ender Wiggin - Bean[3]A five-part series that picks up where Ender's Game: Battle School left off. Ender Wiggin may be the only hope that humanity has against an alien race that threatens Earth with annihilation. He's been given his own army, and now commands 40 soldiers in a series of war games in preparation for invasion... and he's only nine years old! The classic sci-fi story heads to its incredible conclusion as Ender takes control of Dragon Army. But Ender is quickly realizing that the aliens may not be his true enemy in Battle School... his Teachers are!A five-part series that picks up where Ender's Shadow: Battle School left off. With time running out for the human race, Bean is assigned to Dragon army under the command of the legendary Ender Wiggin. But their relationship is a bruising clash of egos and agendas from the start - and it only gets worse when Dragon face their first battleReleased June 2009, this one-shot is the first in all new content not released in novel format. Ender Wiggin may be in space learning to fight Formics, but his older siblings Peter and Valentine are saving the world back on Earth. When Valentine learns of an injustice in her school, she wants to fight it. Enter Peter who guides his sister through the process of nonviolent influence, and sets the ball rolling for his plans to one day rule the world. Jake Black, writer of the upcoming Ender's Game Companion, adds this previously untold story to the Ender's Universe. Ender's Game.[4]Released December 2009, this one-shot is based on the novel of the same name, taking place during the events of Ender's Game and Ender's Shadow. Zeck Morgan was raised by his minister father to be a pious, God-fearing child, devoted to his church. Unfortunately, when the International Fleet decides Zeck is a candidate for training in Battle School, they tear him from his home and prepare him for war. Zeck refuses to participate in the school's war-games due to his pacifist religious beliefs. When he sees another student celebrating Christmas--seemingly violating Battle School's rules against religious practice--he raises an uproar that may tear Battle School apart. Can even Ender Wiggin calm this furor? [5]Released February 2010, this is a one-shot prequel based on the short story of the same name. Mazer Rackham, the only man ever to defeat the Formics, takes on a new enemy the International Fleet itself. Burdened with careerists and bureaucrats, the I.F. is doomed to fail in the coming war, and only Rackham, with the help a young Hyrum Graff, can rid the I.F. of its old guard and pave the way for Earths next great commander.[6]Released April 2010, Ender Wiggin is not the only genius child to influence the course of Earth's history. Not even the only one in his family. After the end of the final Formic War, the nations of the Earth are scrambling for power...and Peter and Valentine Wiggin, Ender's older and equally intelligent siblings, will start and end a world war with nothing more than words. This follow-up to Ender's Game fills in new detail between the pages of the multiple Hugo Award winning Ender Wiggin series by Orson Scott Card.[7]Released from June-October 2010. The direct sequel to Enders Game. Thirteen-year-old Ender Wiggin has saved mankind from an alien threat. His reward? Exile. Branded a monster by those who feel threatened by his military genius, Ender is suddenly a hero without a home. Consumed with guilt, Ender must face his own demons and the people who are bent on stripping him of power. Based on the bestselling novel of the of the same name by Orson Scott Card.[8]Monthly release began in January 2011. Ender Wiggin was twelve years old when he destroyed an alien race. Burdened with guilt, he wrote Speaker for the Dead and created a pseudo-religion that spanned the known worlds. Now an adult, Ender is called to investigate a murder committed by a new alien species with a seemingly gruesome nature. Can Ender uncover the truth before another species and more human lives are lost? Based on the award-winning novel by Orson Scott Card. [9]Monthly release began in February 2011. The story is said be the second story in the comics to not be based on either a novel or short story, making it all new content. (The first to have all new content was Recruiting Valentine.) Ender Wiggin may have ended humanity's war with the Formic race in the best-selling, award-winning novel "Ender's Game" by Orson Scott Card, but the fight to squash the bugs began long before the battle strategist even took his first baby steps. Now for the first time ever, fans finally get to see how the Ender Saga first began with the seven-issue limited series.[10]Monthly releases began in December 2011. The story is not based on a novel or short story, making it all new content. This is a five-issue limited series.[11]As with the novels the comics do have a correct time line, of which each story takes place.An adaptation of Orson Scott Card's short story The Gold Bug, first published in Card's webzine Intergalactic Medicine Show, was released on March 17, 2007 as a bonus with the purchase of the hardcover edition of the comic adaptation Red Prophet: The Tales of Alvin Maker.[12]Gold Bug appears in the hardcover edition of Red Prophet: The Tales of Alvin Maker.1 Background

1.1 Format

1.1 Format2 Titles

2.1 Ender's Game: Battle School
2.2 Ender's Shadow: Battle School
2.3 Ender's Game: Command School
2.4 Ender's Shadow: Command School
2.5 Recruiting Valentine
2.6 War of Gifts
2.7 Mazer in Prison
2.8 The League War
2.9 Ender in Exile
2.10 Speaker for the Dead
2.11 Formic Wars: Burning Earth
2.12 Formic Wars: Silent Strike

2.1 Ender's Game: Battle School2.2 Ender's Shadow: Battle School2.3 Ender's Game: Command School2.4 Ender's Shadow: Command School2.5 Recruiting Valentine2.6 War of Gifts2.7 Mazer in Prison2.8 The League War2.9 Ender in Exile2.10 Speaker for the Dead2.11 Formic Wars: Burning Earth2.12 Formic Wars: Silent Strike3 Chronological order of series4 Other series

4.1 Gold Bug

4.1 Gold Bug5 Collected editions6 See also7 References8 External links1.1 Format2.1 Ender's Game: Battle School2.2 Ender's Shadow: Battle School2.3 Ender's Game: Command School2.4 Ender's Shadow: Command School2.5 Recruiting Valentine2.6 War of Gifts2.7 Mazer in Prison2.8 The League War2.9 Ender in Exile2.10 Speaker for the Dead2.11 Formic Wars: Burning Earth2.12 Formic Wars: Silent Strike4.1 Gold BugList of characters in the Ender's Game seriesConcepts in the Ender's Game seriesList of works by Orson Scott CardEnder's Game (series)Ender's Game: Battle School at the Grand Comics DatabaseEnder's Game: Battle School at the Comic Book DB3 Idiots (stylized as 3 idiots) is a 2009 Indian comedy-drama film directed by Rajkumar Hirani, with a screenplay by Abhijat Joshi, and produced by Vidhu Vinod Chopra. It was loosely adapted from the novel Five Point Someone by Chetan Bhagat. 3 Idiots stars Aamir Khan, Kareena Kapoor, R. Madhavan, Sharman Joshi, Omi Vaidya, Parikshit Sahni and Boman Irani.Upon release, the film broke all opening box office records in India. It was the highest-grossing film in its opening weekend in India and had the highest opening day collections for a Bollywood film. It also had the record for highest net collections in the first week for a Bollywood film. Within 10 days of its release, the film crossed the 100 crore (US$18.2 million) mark in India and became the first film of 2009 to do so. The film also created a new box office record for a release in the last quarter of a year (October to December), breaking the previous record set by Ghajini. It is also the highest-grossing film to be released in the second half of the year (July to December), breaking the previous record also held by Ghajini.3 Idiots has become the highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time in India,[4] breaking the previous record set by Ghajini which also starred Aamir Khan. It also became one of the few Indian films to become a major success in East Asian markets such as China,[5] eventually bringing its overseas total to US $25 millionthe highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time in overseas markets.[6][7] It was expected to be the first Indian film to be officially released on YouTube, within 12 weeks of releasing in theaters on 25 March 2010, but finally got officially released on YouTube in May 2012.[8] The film also went on to win many awards, winning six Filmfare Awards including best film and best director, ten Star Screen Awards and sixteen IIFA awards.The film also uses real inventions by little-known people in India's backyards. The brains behind the innovations were Remya Jose, a student from Kerala, who created the exercise-bicycle/washing-machine; Mohammad Idris, a barber from Meerut district in Uttar Pradesh, who invented a bicycle-powered horse clipper; and Jahangir Painter, a painter from Maharashtra, who made the scooter-powered flour mill.[9] This film was remade in Tamil as Nanban (2012) which also received critical praise and commercial success.[10][11] It has also been announced that there will be a Chinese remake of the film produced by Stephen Chow and that there are plans for a Hollywood remake produced in the United States.[12]Farhan Qureshi(R. Madhavan), Raju Rastogi (Sharman Joshi) and Ranchhoddas "Rancho" Shamaldas Chhanchad (Aamir Khan) are three engineering students who share a room in the residence of Imperial College of Engineering (ICE). Farhan is studying engineering to pursue his father's wishes over his own wish  to become a wildlife photographer. Raju is studying to get his family out of poverty. On the other hand, Rancho studies for his simple passion in machines. Rancho believes that one should follow excellence, not success, as success will take care of itself if excellence is followed.However, this different approach is sneered upon by the dean of the college, Professor Viru "Virus" Sahastrabuddhe (Boman Irani). Virus's favorite student, Chatur "Silencer" Ramalingam (Omi Vaidya), believes in mindless memorizing over understanding in order to reach his goals of corporate status. Rancho falls in love with Virus's daughter Pia (Kareena Kapoor), a medical student. Angered, Virus continually attempts to break Rancho's friendship with Farhan and Raju. Things further escalate when the three friends drunkenly break into Virus's house one night. The next day, Virus threatens to rusticate Raju unless he squeals on Rancho. Not wanting to betray his friend or let down his family, Raju attempts suicide and ends up in a coma. With two months of extensive care from his mother, Rancho, Farhan, and Pia, he makes a full recovery and thus discards his fear of the future. His frankness impresses the corporate agents during a job interview and they hire him. Farhan, goaded by his friends, convinces his parents to allow him to drop out of school and follow his wildlife photographer dream.Virus schemes to set Raju an impossibly tough final exam, as the job offer is contingent on graduation. Pia learns of this and informs Rancho and Farhan, who break into Virus's office for the exam. Virus catches them and expels them on the spot. Pia angrily confronts him, revealing that her brother, whom their father had pushed to become an engineer despite his preference for literature, committed suicide after failing ICE's entrance exam three times. Pia then flees to her hospital. Later that night, Pia's pregnant older sister Mona (Mona Singh) goes into labor. A heavy rainstorm cuts all power and floods the streets, making it impossible for an ambulance  or Pia  to reach Mona. The students rig up a power supply and other equipment so that, with guidance from Pia by webcam, they can deliver the baby. The baby is apparently stillborn, but kicks when the students all chant Rancho's calming mantra "All is well." The baby recovers and Virus is thus obliged to forgive Rancho and his friends, allowing them to stay for their final exams.Their story is framed as intermittent flashbacks from the present day, ten years after Chatur bet that he'd become more successful than Rancho. Chatur, who now boasts of his wealth and his bright career with an American company, is eager to rub Rancho's nose in it. Raju and Farhan have tried to find Rancho for five years with no results; with Chatur's help, they travel to the Chhanchad estate in Shimla, where they find a completely different man: the real Ranchhoddas Chanchad (Jaaved Jaffrey). They coerce the stranger into revealing the truth: their friend was an orphaned servant boy who loved learning, unlike the real Rancho. After seeing the boy's intelligence, Rancho's father arranged for the servant boy to go to college and earn a degree in Rancho's name. The real Rancho reveals that their friend is now a schoolteacher in Ladakh.On the way, the three rescue Pia from an unhappy wedding, over Chatur's objections: he wants to get the trip finished quickly, because he is in a hurry to seal a business deal with Phunsukh Wangdu, a renowned scientist. In Ladakh, Raju and Farhan find villagers working with gadgets that show the stamp of Rancho's ingenuity, and learn that Rancho has all of Farhan's photography books and reads Raju's blog every day. The three friends reunite and Pia and Rancho rekindle their love, while Chatur mocks Rancho. However, Rancho reveals his true name: Phunsukh Wangdu. Chatur, mortified, accepts his defeat and pleads with Phunsukh to forgive him and accept his company's contract. Phunsukh, Pia, Farhan and Raju run laughing into the distance with Chatur in pursuit.The shoot of the film with the supporting characters began on 28 July 2008. Hirani and his team left in late August for the shoot with the principal cast. The film was shot in [13] Delhi, Bangalore, Mumbai, Ladakh, Chail and Shimla. Aamir and rest of the cast began shooting in early September. Hirani planned to wrap up the film by December.[14] The first scene was shot in an aircraft with Madhavan. From Mumbai, the crew and cast comprising Aamir and Kareena went to Ladakh for a 20-day schedule.[15] The shooting also took place at the Indian Institute of Management  Bangalore for 33 days as a part of the second schedule of production.[16] A scene of the movie was also shot at Indian Institute Of Technology Bombay (Mumbai).[citation needed]The film initially opened up on 1800 prints worldwide.[17] 3 Idiots was released in 415 screens overseas.[18]As of February 2012, 3 Idiots grossed roughly 385 crore (US$96.77 million).[3] Box Office India declared the film an "All time Blockbuster",[19] and it is one of the films on their list of "Biggest Blockbusters Ever In Hindi Cinema".[20]3 idiots flim broke all box office records upon release. In its four-day first weekend, the film netted 38 crore (US$6.92 million), and broke the record held by Ghajini for the first weekend collections.[21] By the first week, the film netted 79.5 crore (US$14.47 million), again breaking the box office record held by Ghajini.[22] 3 Idiots had nett grossed 56 crore (US$10.19 million) in its 2nd week,30.25 crore (US$5.51 million) during the third week,16 crore (US$2.91 million) in its fourth week and 9.75 crore (US$1.77 million) in fifth to make a total of 191 crore (US$34.76 million) in five weeks.[23]Box Office India declared the film an "All time Blockbuster", and it is one of the films on their list of "Biggest Blockbusters Ever In Hindi Cinema".[24]3 Idiots is the highest-grossing Bollywood film in overseas markets with record overseas gross of US$ 25 million.[6][5][25] It set record collections for Indian-produced films in territories such as United States,[4] Australia,[26] Fiji, and some African territories.[citation needed] In the United States, the film earned $6.5 million since its opening,[4][26] in addition to over $2.5 million in the United Kingdom, over $2 million in Canada, nearly $1 million in Australia, and over $3 million in South Korea.[26]Unusual for an Indian film, 3 Idiots has become a major success in East Asian markets.[27] The film had the longest showing period at cinemas in Taiwan, for more than two months from December 2010, breaking the record of Avatar, with over TWD $10 million grossed. The film was the first aired Indian film in Hong Kong, where it grossed HKD $22 million since its showing from September 1, 2011, as of January 2012,[28] and the equivalent of over US $3 million as of 4 March 2012.[26] In China, where it is known as San Geshagua ("Three Idiots"),[27] the film grossed $1.15 million in four days in December 2011,[29] eventually crossing the $2 million mark within 18 days,[5] and nearly $3 million within a month, as of 5 January 2012.[30] Alongside the original Hindi version, a Chinese-dubbed version was also released, with the popular actress Tang Wei (best known for Lust, Caution) voicing Kareena Kapoor's role.[31] One reason for its success in East Asian markets such as China and Hong Kong is because of their similar education systems, thus many students were able to identify with the characters,[27] with some Chinese universities "even prescribing the film in their coursework as a kind of stress-relief in their classrooms."[31] Following its success in other Asian markets, Japanese distributor Nikkatsu has announced plans to release the film in Japan.[32]Unlike the original novel, 3 Idiots received highly positive reviews upon its release. Subhash K. Jha (film critic and author of The Essential Guide to Bollywood) states: "It's not that 3 Idiots is a flawless work of art. But it is a vital, inspiring and life-revising work of contemporary art with some heart imbued into every part. In a country where students are driven to suicide by their impossible curriculum, 3 Idiots provides hope. Maybe cinema can't save lives. But cinema, sure as hell, can make you feel life is worth living. 3 Idiots does just that, and much more. The director takes the definition of entertainment into directions of social comment without assuming that he knows best."[33] Nikhat Kazmi of the Times of India gave it four and a half stars and suggests that, "The film is a laugh riot, despite being high on fundas [...] Hirani carries forward his simplistic `humanism alone works' philosophy of the Lage Raho Munna Bhai series in 3 Idiots too, making it a warm and vivacious signature tune to 2009. The second half of the film does falter in parts, specially the child birth sequence, but it doesn't take long for the film to jump back on track." [34] Mayank Shekhar of the Hindustan Times gave the film three and a half out of five stars and comments that "this is the sort of movie youll take home with a smile and a song on your lips." [35] Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave 3 Idiots four and a half out of five stars and states: "On the whole, 3 Idiots easily ranks amongst Aamir, Rajkumar Hirani and Vidhu Vinod Chopra's finest films. Do yourself and your family a favour: Watch 3 Idiots. It's emotional, it's entertaining, it's enlightening. The film has tremendous youth appeal and feel-good factor to work in a big way." [36] Kaveree Bamzai of India Today gave 3 Idiots five stars and argues that "it's a lovely story, of a man from nowhere who wanted to learn, told like a fairy tale, with the secret heart carrying its coded message of setting all of us free." [37]Other critics gave the film a mixed review. Sonia Chopra of Sify gave the film 3 stars and said "Though a bit too calculated and designed, 3 Idiots is still an ok option for the significant message, interesting cast and scattered breezy moments."[38] Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN gave the film three out of five stars and states: "Going home after watching 3 Idiots I felt like I'd just been to my favorite restaurant only to be a tad under-whelmed by their signature dish. It was a satisfying meal, don't get me wrong, but not the best meal I'd been expecting." [39] Shubhra Gupta from The Indian Express also gave it 3 stars, stating "3 Idiots does not do as much for me. The emotional truth that shone through both the Munnabhai movies doesnt come through strongly enough."[40] Raja Sen of Rediff gave the film two out of five stars and states: "Rajkumar Hirani's one of the directors of the decade, a man with immense talent and a knack for storytelling. On his debut, he hit a hundred. With his second, he hit a triple century. This time, he fishes outside the offstump, tries to play shots borrowed from other batters, and hits and misses to provide a patchy, 32*-type innings. It's okay, boss, *chalta hai*. Even Sachin has an off day, and we still have great hope."[41]The film has also been highly acclaimed overseas. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a 100% "fresh" critics' rating based on five reviews as well as an audience rating of 92% based on nearly 20,000 votes. Derek Elley of Variety wrote that "3 Idiots takes a while to lay out its game plan but pays off emotionally in its second half." Robert Abele of Los Angeles Times wrote that there's an "unavoidable joie de vivre (symbolized by Rancho's meditative mantra "All is well") and a performance charm that make this one of the more naturally gregarious Bollywood imports." Louis Proyect described it as a "fabulous achievement across the board. A typical Bollywood confection but also social commentary on a dysfunctional engineering school system that pressures huge numbers of students into suicide."[42] The Korean site Naver gave the film a review rating of 9.4 out of 10.[43] On the Chinese site Douban, 3 Idiots currently holds an average audience rating of 9.1 out of 10 based on nearly 250,000 votes.[44]57th National Film Awards[45]2010 IIFA Awards[46]2010 Filmfare Awards2010 Max Stardust Awards2010 Star Screen AwardsThe film's soundtrack is composed by Shantanu Moitra with lyrics penned by Swanand Kirkire.Prior to the release of the film director Rajkumar Hirani commented on the relationship between Five Point Someone by Chetan Bhagat and 3 Idiots stating:The day after the film opened, Chetan also noted:A controversy developed a few days after the release, however, over the fact that Chetan's credit, "Based on the novel Five Point Someone by Chetan Bhagat" appeared in the closing credits rather than in the opening ones.[55] At that time, Bhagat stated that he "was expecting an opening credit and I was quite surprised on not seeing it. They had bought the rights, made the payment and committed to a credit in the contract. Its there, but its not about it being there, its about the placement and the prominence."[56] In a 31 December 2009 blog post on his personal website, Bhagat stated that he was told the movie was only 25% based on the book, but when he saw it, he felt that it was 70% of the book. He also argued that he was misled by the makers of the film, though he noted, that "this has nothing to do with Mr. Arpit Godha [...] I am a big fan of Aamir and he has made my story reach people. However, he was told by the makers not to read the book, and he hasnt. Thus, he cannot comment on the issue in a meaningful manner." [57]A few people responded to Chetan's statements. According to the Indo-Asian News Service (IANS), during a press conference with reporters producer Vidhu Vinod Chopra "clarified that in the agreement between the producer and Bhagat, it was clearly mentioned that the authors name would be put in the closing credits." IANS also reported that Chopra "lost his cool" and "asked a reporter to shut up after being questioned whether his hit 3 Idiots was lifted from author Chetan Bhagats book Five Point Someone."[58] Chopra later apologized, stating: "I really think Im silly. I was provoked, but I shouldnt have done this. I saw myself on TV and saw how I was shouting shut up, shut up like an animal. I told myself  what nonsensical behaviour."[59] Arpit Godha also responded to these claims.[55][60] Rajkumar Hirani stated that "We have officially bought the rights for the film. We drew a contract with him and it clearly mentions about the position of his credit. With open eyes he had seen the contract, consulted his lawyer and signed the agreement [...] In the contract, we have said that the title would be given in the rolling credits. We haven't changed the font size. We haven't increased the speed of the title. It's exactly there where it was agreed to be." [61] Chetan Bhagat later apologized stating, "I definitely do not have anything against team 3 Idiots. I may have some issues on the mistake they may have made but nothing about their personality or the kind of people they are. I apologise to their families if there was any distress caused to them. I also want to thank all my fans, who stood by me but I don't want them to turn against anyone especially Aamir."[62]This film was remade as a South Indian Tamil film entitled Nanban, in January 2012.[10][11][63]Following the success of 3 Idiots in East Asian markets such as China and Hong Kong, the producer Vidhu Vinod Chopra has announced that Hong Kong film star Stephen Chow (known for comedy films such as Shaolin Soccer and Kung Fu Hustle) will be producing a Chinese remake of the film. Chopra also announced that there are plans for a Hollywood remake, and is in talks with three different American studios interested in remaking the film. Chopra also stated that there is an Italian film studio also interested in remaking the film.[12]25 December 2009(2009-12-25)HindiEnglish1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Release5 Box office

5.1 India
5.2 Overseas

5.1 India5.2 Overseas6 Critical reception7 Awards8 Soundtrack9 Controversy10 Remakes11 See also12 References13 External links5.1 India5.2 OverseasRupinder BrAr as Rupinder BurjAamir Khan as Ranchhoddas "Rancho" Shamaldas Chhanchad / Phunsukh Wangdu/ChhoteKareena Kapoor as Pia SahasrabuddheR. Madhavan as Farhan QureshiSharman Joshi as Raju RastogiBoman Irani as Viru Sahasrabuddhe (Virus)Omi Vaidya as Chatur Ramalingam (Silencer)Rahul Kumar as Manmohan "MM" aka MillimeterMona Singh as Mona SahasrabuddheSanjay Lafont as SuhasParikshit Sahni as Mr. QureshiFarida Dadi as Mrs. QureshiAmardeep Jha as Mrs. RastogiMukund Bhatt as Mr. RastogiJaved Jaffrey as Ranchhoddas Shamaldas Chhanchad (Cameo)Arun Bali as Shamaldas ChhanchadAli Fazal as Joy LoboAkhil Mishra as Mr. Dubey (Librarian)Rajeev Ravindranathan as Lead Ragging SeniorHarvinder Singh as Mr. DhillonAchyut Potdar as Workshop Class ProfessorPitobash as ICE college studentat IndiaBest Popular Film Providing Wholesome EntertainmentBest Audiography  Anup DevBest Lyrics  Swanand Kirkire  "Behti Hawa Sa Tha Woh"Best Film  3 IdiotsBest Direction  Rajkumar HiraniBest Story  Abhijat Joshi, Rajkumar Hirani and Vidhu Vinod ChopraBest Supporting Actor  Sharman JoshiBest Actress  Kareena KapoorBest Actor in a negative role  Boman IraniBest Lyricist  Swanand KirkireBest Singer Male  Shaan  "Behti Hawa Sa Tha Woh"Best Cinematography  C. K. Muraleedharan, ISCBest Screenplay  Abhijat Joshi, Rajkumar Hirani & Vidhu Vinod ChopraBest Dialogue  Rajkumar Hirani & Abhijat JoshiBest Editing  Rajkumar HiraniBest Sound Recording  Bishwadeep Chatterjee & Nihal Ranjan SamalBest Song Recording  Bishwadeep Chatterjee & Sachin K SanghviBest Sound Re-Recording  Anup DevBest Background Score  Sanjay Wandrekar,Atul Raninga & Shantanu MoitraBest Film  Vidhu Vinod ChopraBest Director  Rajkumar HiraniBest Supporting Actor  Boman IraniBest Dialogue  Raj Kumar Hirani and Vidhu Vinod ChopraBest Story  Abhijat Joshi and Rajkumar HiraniBest Screenplay  Rajkumar Hirani and Vidhu Vinod ChopraReaders Choice Awards for Star Of The Year (Female)  Kareena KapoorReaders Choice Awards for Best Film Of The Year  Drama  Rajkumar HiraniBest Film  Rajkumar HiraniBest Director  Rajkumar HiraniBest Popular Actress  Kareena KapoorBest Villain  Boman IraniBest Comedian  Omi VaidyaBest Screenplay  Abhijat Joshi, Rajkumar Hirani, Vidhu Vinod ChopraBest Dialogue  Abhijat Joshi, Rajkumar HiraniBest Editing  Rajkumar HiraniBest Choreography  Bosco-Caesar  "Zoobi Doobi"Most Promising Newcomer  Male  Omi Vaidya[47][48]List of highest-grossing Bollywood filmsList of Bollywood highest-grossing films in overseas marketsOfficial website3 Idiots at the Internet Movie Database3 Idiots at Box Office Mojo3 Idiots at AllRovi3 Idiots at Bollywood HungamaThe Hunger Games is a 2012 American science fiction film directed by Gary Ross, based on the novel of the same name by Suzanne Collins. The film was produced by Nina Jacobson and Jon Kilik, with a screenplay by Ross, Collins, and Billy Ray. It stars Jennifer Lawrence, Josh Hutcherson, Liam Hemsworth, Woody Harrelson, Elizabeth Banks, and Donald Sutherland.[5]The story takes place in a dystopian post-apocalyptic future in the nation of Panem, where boys and girls between the ages of 12 and 18 must participate in the Hunger Games, a televised annual event in which the "tributes" are required to fight to the death until there is one remaining victor. The protagonist, Katniss Everdeen (Lawrence), volunteers to take her younger sister's place in the games. Joined by her district's male tribute Peeta Mellark (Hutcherson), Katniss travels to the Capitol to train for the Hunger Games under the guidance of former victor Haymitch Abernathy (Harrelson).The film was released on March 21, 2012, in France[6] and in the US on March 23, 2012,[7] in both conventional theaters and digital IMAX theaters.[8] Japan received it last, on September 28. When the film released, it set records for opening day ($67.3 million) and opening weekend for a non-sequel.[9] At the time of its release, the film's opening weekend gross ($152.5million) was the third-largest of any movie in North America.[10] It is the first film since Avatar to remain in first place at the North American box office for four consecutive weekends.[11] The movie was a massive box-office success by grossing $685 million worldwide against its budget of $78 million.[4] It was released on DVD and Blu-ray on August 18, 2012.[12]The Hunger Games received positive reviews, with praise for its themes and messages, as well as Lawrence's performance as Katniss. Like the novel, the film has attracted criticism for its similarities to other works, such as the Japanese novel Battle Royale, its film adaptation, and the Shirley Jackson short story "The Lottery." Collins' novel and screenplay draw on sources of inspiration such as the myth of Theseus, Roman gladiatorial games, reality television, and the desensitization of viewers to media coverage of real-life tragedy and war, not to think as just an audience member, "Because those are real people on the screen, and theyre not going away when the commercials start to roll."[13]The nation of Panem consists of a wealthy Capitol and twelve poorer districts. As punishment for a past rebellion, each district must provide a boy and girl ("tributes") between the ages of 12 and 18 selected by lottery (the "Reaping") for the annual Hunger Games. The tributes must fight to the death in an arena and the sole survivor is rewarded with fame and wealth. In her first Reaping, 12-year-old Primrose Everdeen is chosen from District 12. Her older sister Katniss volunteers to take her place. Peeta Mellark, a baker's son who once gave Katniss bread when she was starving, is the other District 12 tribute.Katniss and Peeta are taken to the Capitol, accompanied by their frequently drunk mentor and past victor, Haymitch Abernathy. He warns them about the "Career" tributes who train intensively at special academies and almost always win.During a TV interview with Caesar Flickerman, Peeta unexpectedly reveals his love for Katniss. She is outraged, believing it to be a ploy to gain audience support, as "sponsors" may provide in-Games gifts of food, medicine and tools. However, she discovers Peeta meant what he said.The televised Games begin with half of the tributes killed in the first few minutes; Katniss barely survives ignoring Haymitch's advice to run away from the melee over the tempting supplies and weapons strewn in front of a structure called the Cornucopia. Peeta forms an uneasy alliance with the four Careers. They later find Katniss and corner her up a tree. Rue, hiding in a nearby tree, draws her attention to a poisonous tracker jacker nest. Katniss drops it on her sleeping besiegers. They all scatter, except for Glimmer, who is killed by the insects. Hallucinating due to tracker jacker venom, Katniss is warned to run away by Peeta. Rue cares for Katniss until she recovers.Meanwhile, the alliance has gathered up all the supplies. Katniss has Rue draw them off, then destroys the stockpile by setting off the mines planted around it. Furious, Cato kills the boy assigned to guard it. Katniss frees Rue from a trap, then dodges a spear thrown by Marvel; it strikes Rue. Katniss kills Marvel, then comforts the dying Rue with a song. Afterward, she gathers and arranges flowers around the body. When this is televised, it sparks a riot in Rue's District 11. Panem President Snow summons Seneca Crane, the Gamemaker, to express his displeasure at the way the Games are turning out.Since Katniss and Peeta have been portrayed as "star-crossed lovers", Haymitch convinces Crane to make a rule change to avoid further unrest. It is announced that tributes from the same district can win as a pair. Upon hearing this, Katniss searches for Peeta and finds him with an infected sword wound in the leg. She pretends to be deeply in love with him and gains a sponsor's gift of soup. An announcer proclaims a feast, where the thing each survivor needs most will be provided. Peeta begs her not to risk getting him medicine. Katniss promises not to go, but after he falls asleep, she heads to the feast. Clove ambushes her, pins her, and gloats. Thresh, the other District 11 tribute, kills Clove after overhearing her tormenting Katniss about killing Rue. He spares Katniss in Rue's memory. The medicine works, keeping Peeta mobile.Foxface, the girl from District 5, dies from eating nightlock berries she stole from Peeta; neither knew they are poisonous. Without warning, Crane darkens the arena and unleashes a pack of hound-like creatures to speed things up. They kill Thresh. Katniss and Peeta flee to the roof of the Cornucopia, where they have to fight Cato. Katniss wounds Cato with an arrow and Peeta hurls him to the creatures below. Katniss shoots Cato to spare him a prolonged death. With Peeta and Katniss apparently victorious, the rule change allowing two winners is suddenly revoked. Peeta tells Katniss to shoot him. Instead, she gives him half of the nightlock. Before they can commit suicide, they are hastily proclaimed the victors of the 74th Hunger Games.Haymitch warns Katniss that she has made powerful enemies with her display of defiance. She and Peeta return home, while Crane is locked in a room with a bowl of nightlock berries, and President Snow ponders the situation.In March 2009, Lions Gate Entertainment entered into a co-production agreement for The Hunger Games with Nina Jacobson's production company Color Force, which had acquired worldwide distribution rights to the novel a few weeks earlier,[25][26] reportedly for $200,000.[27] Alli Shearmur and Jim Miller, President and Senior Vice President of Motion Picture Production at Lionsgate, took charge of overseeing the production of the film, which they described as "an incredible property... a thrill to bring home to Lionsgate."[28] The studio, which had not made a profit for five years, raided the budgets of other productions and sold assets to secure a budget of $88,000,000  one of its largest ever[29]  for the film.[27][30] Collins' agent Jason Dravis remarked that "they [Lionsgate] had everyone but the valet call us" to help secure the franchise.[30] Lionsgate subsequently acquired tax breaks of $8million for shooting the film in North Carolina.[30] The production was eventually brought in under-budget at $78million.[31]Collins adapted the novel for film herself,[25] in collaboration with screenwriter Billy Ray and director Gary Ross.[32][33] The screenplay remains extremely faithful to the original novel,[34] with Ross saying he "felt the only way to make the film really successful was to be totally subjective", echoing Collins' presentation of the novel in the first person present.[35] Instead of Katniss' internal monologue about the Capitol's machinations, the screenplay expanded the character of Seneca Crane, the Head Gamemaker, to allow several developments to be shown directly to the audience. Ross explained, "In the book, Katniss speculates about the game-makers manipulations... in the film, we can't get inside Katnisss head, but we do have the ability to cut away and actually show the machinations of the Capitol behind the scenes. I created the game center and also expanded the role of Seneca Crane for those reasons. I thought it was tonally important."[35] Ross also added several scenes between Crane and Coriolanus Snow, the elderly President of Panem, noting that "I thought that it was very interesting that there would be one generation [of Panem citizens] who knew that [the Games] were actually an instrument of political control, and there would be a successive generation who was so enamoured with the ratings and the showbiz and the sensations and the spectacle that that was subsuming the actual political intention, and that's really where the tension is".[36]The Gamemakers' control center, about which Katniss can only speculate in the novel, was also developed as a location, helping to remind the audience of the artificial nature of the arena. Ross commented that, "so much of the film happens in the woods that it's easy to forget this is a futuristic society, manipulating these events for the sake of an audience. The look of the control center, the antiseptic feeling of it and the use of holograms were all intended to make the arena feel 'constructed' even when you weren't seeing the control room."[35] Ross and visual effects supervisor Sheena Duggan were keen to use the omniscient view that the setting provided to justify the literal dei ex machina Katniss experiences in the arena; Duggan explained that "we really didn't want to have to explain things... how do you get compelled by these [animals] that just appear at the end of the movie? we wanted to find a way to introduce them without having to explain specifically and exactly what they were and the game room was a really great opportunity for us to be able to do that."[37]Lionsgate confirmed in March 2011 that about 30 actresses auditioned or read for the role of Katniss Everdeen, including Hailee Steinfeld, Abigail Breslin, Emma Roberts, Saoirse Ronan, Chlo Grace Moretz, Jodelle Ferland, Lyndsy Fonseca, Emily Browning, Shailene Woodley, and Kaya Scodelario.[3][38] On March 16, 2011 it was announced that Oscar nominee Jennifer Lawrence of the indie film Winter's Bone had landed the coveted role.[39] Ross described Lawrence as having "an incredible amount of self-assuredness, you got the sense that this girl knew exactly who she was. And then she came in and read for me and just knocked me out; I'd never seen an audition like that before in my life. It was one of those things where you just glimpse your whole movie in front of you."[37]Though Lawrence was 20 when filming began, four years older than the character,[40] Collins said that the role demanded "a certain maturity and power" and said she would rather the actress be older than younger.[41] She added that Lawrence was the "only one who truly captured the character I wrote in the book" and that she had "every essential quality necessary to play Katniss."[42] Lawrence, a fan of the books, took three days to accept the role, initially intimidated by the size of the production.[3][43]Contenders for the role of Peeta other than Hutcherson included Alexander Ludwig (who was later cast as Cato), Hunter Parrish, Lucas Till, and Evan Peters.[44] Other actors considered for the role of Gale included David Henrie, Drew Roy, and Robbie Amell.[44] In April 2011, John C. Reilly was in talks with Lions Gate Entertainment to portray Haymitch Abernathy, former victor of a Hunger Games held years before and mentor to Katniss and Peeta.[45] The following month Lionsgate announced that the role had gone to Oscar nominee Woody Harrelson.[17] The casting of Lenny Kravitz as Cinna, Stanley Tucci as Caesar Flickerman, and Toby Jones as Claudius Templesmith, soon followed. Multiple-Golden Globe award winner Donald Sutherland completed the major characters, cast as President Coriolanus Snow in late May 2011.[46]Gary Ross became director in November 2010.[47][48] Fireman's Fund Insurance Company insured the production, but as part of the underwriting process insisted on a thorough risk analysis of hazards as diverse as wayward arrows, poison ivy, bears, bugs, and a chase across fast-running water.[49]Lawrence dyed her blonde hair dark for the part of Katniss.[50] She also underwent extensive training to get in shape for the role, including archery, rock and tree climbing, combat, running, parkour, and yoga,[51] and experienced an accident on the last day of her six week training phase, in which she hit a wall while running at full speed, but was not seriously injured. Other stars who dyed their hair for the movie include Josh Hutcherson as Peeta, and Liam Hemsworth as Gale.[3] Lionsgate hired archer (and Olympic bronze medalist) Khatuna Lorig to teach Lawrence how to shoot.[49]With an initial budget of $75million,[52] principal photography began near Brevard in Transylvania County in Western North Carolina in May 2011[53] and concluded on September 15, 2011, with a final budget reported as between $90 and $100million, reduced to $78million after subsidies.[1][3] Steven Soderbergh served as a second unit director,[54] and filmed much of the District 11 riot scene.[55] The movie was shot on film as opposed to digital due (in part) to the tightness of the schedule; as Ross said in an interview with The New York Times, "I didn't want to run the risk of the technical issues that often come with shooting digitally  we simply couldn't afford any delays."[56]Virtually all production photography took place in North Carolina, with Lionsgate receiving tax credits of around $8million from the state government to do so. Forbes magazine estimated that the state economy gained up to $60million from the production, with over 5,000 people employed as extras, crew and support staff.[57] Most outdoor scenes, both from the arena and from the outskirts of District 12, were filmed in DuPont State Forest; the Little River, with its multiple waterfalls, provided several locations for shooting the river running through the arena.[58] The production team built a walkway across the top of Triple Falls for Lawrence to run over the rapids during Katniss' pursuit by the Career tributes.[59]Many of the urban and interior locations, in the Capitol and elsewhere, were filmed in Shelby and Charlotte. Ross and production designer Phil Messina drew on the buildings of the 1939 New York World's Fair and symbols of political power including Tiananmen Square and Red Square, when designing the Capitol architecture, which they wanted "to be set in the future but have a sense of its own past... it's festive and alluring and indulgent and decadent but it also has to have the kind of might and power behind it".[60][61] For Katniss' neighborhood in District 12, the production team found Henry River Mill Village, an abandoned mill town which Ross said "just worked perfectly for the movie to evoke the scene"; Messina explained that "originally we talked about maybe building one house and the facade of the house next door and redressing it, and maybe doing some CG extensions... we ended up finding a whole abandoned mill town... it was absolutely perfect."[61]The film has been rated 12A by the British Board of Film Classification (BBFC) in the UK for "intense threat, moderate violence and occasional gory moments".[2] To achieve that rating, Lionsgate had to cut or substitute seven seconds of film by "digitally removing blood splashes and the sight of blood on wounds and weapons".[62] In the United States, the movie was granted a PG-13 rating from the Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA)[63] for "intense violent thematic material and disturbing images  all involving teens"; as Collins had originally anticipated.[64]The soundtrack album for the The Hunger Games contains songs inspired by the film; only three of them appear in the film itself, during the closing credits.[65] The first single from the film's companion album, "Safe & Sound" by Taylor Swift featuring The Civil Wars, was released on December 23, 2011.[66] It reached number one on the iTunes overall charts in 12 hours.[citation needed] The music video for "Safe & Sound" was released on February 13, 2012. Along with separate songs from Swift and The Civil Wars, the soundtrack also features songs by The Decemberists, Arcade Fire, The Secret Sisters, Miranda Lambert featuring The Pistol Annies,[67] Neko Case,[68] Kid Cudi[67] Academy Award winner Glen Hansard,[67] The Low Anthem,[67] Punch Brothers,[67] Birdy,[67] Maroon 5, Jayme Dee,[67] and Carolina Chocolate Drops.[67] The soundtrack was released on March 20, 2012.[69] The soundtrack track list was revealed on iTunes on February 13, 2012, and on the 14th "One Engine" was released as the second single. Jennifer Lawrence singing "Rue's Lullaby" was not included on the soundtrack. The album debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard Top 200 chart, having sold 175,000 copies in its first week. It was the first since Michael Jackson's This Is It to debut at #1. It is one of just 16 soundtracks to grace the top slot in the history of the Top 200.Lionsgate originally announced that Danny Elfman and T-Bone Burnett would score The Hunger Games, with Burnett also acting as the film's executive music producer to produce songs for the soundtrack.[70] Due to scheduling conflicts, Elfman was replaced by James Newton Howard.[71] The score album was released on March 26, 2012.[72]Arcade Fire also contributed to the movie's original score. The group composed the grand, fascistic-inspired, ominous Panem national anthem, entitled "Horn of Plenty", an important and signature leitmotif appearing throughout the film.[73][74] "We were interested in making music that would be more integral in the movie, just as a mental exercise," Butler, who co-wrote the song with Chassagne, explained. "And there's an anthem that runs throughout the books, the national anthem of the fascist Capitol. So as a thought experiment, we tried to write what that might sound like. It's like the Capitol's idea of itself, basically."[73][74] He further added that "it's not a pop song or anything. More of an anthem that could be playing at a big sporting event like the [Hunger] Games. So we did a structure for that, and then James Newton Howard made a movie-score version of it that happens in several places in the film."[73][74] Arcade Fire's Panem national anthem has received strong reviews. According to Spin Mobile, ""Horn of Plenty" pulls off the neat feat of sounding both exactly like Arcade Fire and exactly like a futuristic anthem. It still has one foot in the band's uncorrupted neighborhoods, but another is up on the podium at the end of Star Wars accepting an Olympic gold medal or something. Horns blare, a choir booms, strings swell, the martial percussion steals the show, and we just realized how much we love Big Brother."[75]The film also featured a rather obscure analog track from the 1970s composed by Laurie Spiegel for its "cornucopia scene."[76]The album reached a peak of 71st on the Canadian Albums Chart.[77]The Hunger Games received positive reviews. Based on 266 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an 85% "Certified Fresh" rating and an average score of 7.2 out of 10. The site's consensus reads "thrilling and superbly acted, The Hunger Games captures the dramatic violence, raw emotion, and ambitious scope of its source novel".[78] On Metacritic, the film has a 67 out of 100, indicating "generally favorable reviews", based on reviews from 44 critics.[79] Many critics praised Jennifer Lawrence for her portrayal as Katniss Everdeen, as well as most of the main cast. According to The Hollywood Reporter, Lawrence embodies Katniss, "just as one might imagine her from the novel".[80] Empire magazine said "Lawrence is perfect as Katniss, there's very little softness about her, more a melancholy determination that good must be done even if that requires bad things."[80] Several critics have reviewed the film favorably compared with other young-adult fiction adaptations such as Harry Potter and Twilight. Justin Craig of Fox News rated the film as "[e]xcellent" and stated: "Move over Harry Potter. A darker, more mature franchise has come to claim your throne."[81] Rafer Guzman of Newsday referred to The Hunger Games as being "darker than 'Harry Potter,' more sophisticated than 'Twilight'."[82] David Sexton of The Evening Standard stated that The Hunger Games "is well cast and pretty well acted, certainly when compared with Harry Potter's juvenile leads."[83]Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three stars out of four, praising the movie as "effective entertainment" and Lawrence's performance. Despite being a largely positive review, he criticized the film for being too long and noted that the film misses opportunities for social criticism.[84] Simon Reynolds of Digital Spy gave the film four stars out of five, calling it "enthralling from beginning to end, science fiction that has depth and intelligence to match its pulse-racing entertainment value". Reynolds also spoke highly of Lawrence's performance and director Gary Ross, whose "rough and ready handheld camerawork" meant that viewers were "with Katniss for every blood-flecked moment of her ordeal in the combat arena".[85] However, film critic David Thomson of the magazine The New Republic called it a "terrible movie", criticizing it for a lack of character development and unclear presentation of the violence, describing the latter as "un-American".[86]Eric Goldman of IGN awarded the film four out of five stars, stating that director Gary Ross "gets the tone of The Hunger Games right. This is a grounded, thoughtful and sometimes quite emotional film, with its dark scenario given due weight. Ross doesn't give the film a glossy, romanticized 'Hollywood' feel, but rather plays everything very realistically and stark, as Katniss must endure these outrageous and horrible scenarios."[87] The film received some criticism for its shaky camera style, but it was said to "add to the film in certain ways".[87] The violence drew commentary as well, Time critic Mary Pols considered that the film was too violent for young children, even though the violence had been toned down compared with the novel,[88] while critic Thoden Janes of the Charlotte Observer found that "[...] the violence is so bland it dilutes the message".[89] Also writing in Time, psychologist Christopher J. Ferguson argued that parents' fears of the effect of the film's violent content on their children were unnecessary, and that children are capable of viewing violent content without being psychologically harmed.[90] Both Jennifer Lawrence and Josh Hutcherson were praised for their portrayals as Katniss and Peeta. Many critics also praised Isabelle Fuhrman's chilling portrayal of "Clove", identifying her as a break-out star.[91]On February 22, 2012, The Hunger Games broke the record for first-day advance ticket sales on Fandango, topping the previous record of Eclipse. The sales were reported to be 83percent of the site's totals for the day.[92] According to first tracking, unaided awareness for The Hunger Games was 11%, definite interest was 54%, first choice was 23% and total awareness was 74%.[93] In the week leading up to its release, the film sold-out over 4,300 showings via Fandango and MovieTickets.com[94] On Fandango alone it ranks as the third-highest advance ticket seller ever behind New Moon and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows  Part 2.[95] Finally, according to Fandango it broke the site's single-day sales record (March 23), the mobile sales record for a weekend (March 2325, 2012) and the site's highest share of a film's opening weekend (Fandango sold 22% of the film's opening weekend tickets).[96]The Hunger Games earned $408,010,692 in North America, and $278,522,598 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $686,533,290.[4] It made the largest worldwide opening weekend for a film not released during the summer or the holiday period, earning $211.8million, which was just ahead of Alice in Wonderland's previous record ($210.1million).[97]In North America, The Hunger Games is the thirteenth highest-grossing film, the highest-grossing film released outside the summer or holiday period,[98] and the highest-grossing film distributed by Lionsgate.[99] The film set a midnight-gross record for a non-sequel ($19.7million), which is also the seventh-highest midnight gross overall.[100] On its opening day, it made $67.3million (including midnight showings), setting opening-day and single-day records for a non-sequel, both of which were later surpassed by Marvel's The Avengers.[9] The film also achieved the sixth highest opening-day and seventh highest single-day grosses of all time.[101][102][103] On its opening weekend, the movie grossed $152.5million, breaking Alice in Wonderland's opening-weekend records for a film released in March, for any spring release, and for a non-sequel  the latter surpassed by The Avengers.[99][104][105][106] Its opening weekend gross is also the largest for any film released outside the summer season and the fourth-largest of all time overall.[107] It remained in first place at the North American box office for four consecutive weekends, becoming the first film since Avatar to achieve this.[11][108][109] On June 10, 2012 (its 80th day in theaters), it became the 14th movie to pass the $400-million-mark.[110] On April 20, 2012, Lionsgate and IMAX Corporation announced that due to "overwhelming demand", The Hunger Games would return to North American IMAX cinemas on April 27 for a further one-week engagement.[111]Outside North America, the film was released in most countries during March and April 2012,[112] with the exception of China, where it was released in June 2012.[113] On its first weekend (March 2325, 2012), the film topped the box office outside North America with $59.25million from 67 markets, finishing at first place in most of them.[114] The largest opening weekends were recorded in China ($9.6 million),[113] Australia ($9.48million), and the UK, Ireland and Malta ($7.78 million).[112][115] In total earnings, its highest-grossing markets after North America are the UK, Ireland and Malta ($36.5 million), Australia ($31.1 million), and Germany ($20.0 million).[112]The film was released in North America and the Netherlands on DVD and Blu-ray August 18, 2012 and in the rest of Europe on September 3, 2012. Extras include 'The World is Watching: The Making of The Hunger Games', numerous featurettes, the propaganda video in its entire form, a talk with the director Gary Ross and also Elvis Mitchell and a marketing archive.In its first weekend on sale, Lionsgate reported that 3.8 million DVD/Blu-ray copies of the movie were sold, with more than one-third in the Blu-ray format.[116] Three weeks after the release of the movie to home media formats in the US, over 5 million DVD units and 3.7 million Blu-ray units have been sold.[117][118]Charles McGrath, writing for The New York Times, said that the film will remind viewers of the television series Survivor, a little of The Bachelorette, and of the short story "The Lottery" by Shirley Jackson published in 1948 by The New Yorker.[119] David Sexton of The Evening Standard compared The Hunger Games unfavourably to Kinji Fukasaku's Japanese film Battle Royale, as did several other critics;[83][120][121][122][123] the novel had earlier faced criticism for its similarities to the novel Battle Royale by Koushun Takami.[124] Jonathan Looms of The Oxford Student argues that it is "unfair that the film is only drawing comparisons with Battle Royale" but that it "is a veritable pastiche of other movies" as well, comparing it to The Truman Show, Death Race, the Bourne films, and Zoolander, and that it is common for artists to borrow from and "improve on many sources. Quentin Tarantino has built his career on this principle."[125] It reminded an author at Salon of the 1932 film The Most Dangerous Game.[126]Wheeler Winston Dixon, a film professor at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, listed several precedents: Battle Royale, Jackson's "The Lottery", William Golding's Lord of the Flies, Metropolis, Blade Runner, Death Race 2000, and George Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four.[127] Manohla Dargis in The New York Times compares it to Battle Royale, Ender's Game, and Twilight, but contrasts The Hunger Games in terms of how its "exciting" female protagonist Katniss "rescues herself with resourcefulness, guts and true aim."[128] Steve Rose of The Guardian refers to the film as "think Battle Royale meets The Running Man meets Survivor."[129] Writing in The Atlantic, Govindini Murty made a list of touchstones the film alludes to, from the ancient Greek, Roman and Egyptian civilizations to modern references such as the Great Depression, the Vietnam and Iraq Wars, and reality television.[130] For her part, author Collins cites the myth of Theseus, reality television and coverage of the Iraq War as her inspiration.[131][132][133]During the film's opening weekend, controversial statements about various members of the cast arose, sparking open dialog about issues of racism, sexism and unrealistic body image. In a Jezebel article published March 26, 2012, Dodai Stewart reported that several users on Twitter posted racist tweets, criticizing the portrayals of Rue, Thresh and Cinna by African American actors.[134][135] In a 2011 interview with Entertainment Weekly, Collins stated that while she did not have any ethnic background in mind for lead characters Katniss and Gale because the book is written in "a time period where hundreds of years have passed" and there would be "a lot of ethnic mixing", she explains "there are some characters in the book who are more specifically described", and states that both Rue and Thresh are African American.[136] Lyneka Little of The Wall Street Journal states that although it is easy to find bigoted or offensive postings online, "the racist 'Hunger Games' tweets, because they are so shockingly ignorant even by the standards of the fringes of the internet, have kicked up a storm."[137] Fahima Haque of The Washington Post, Bim Adewunmi of The Guardian, and Christopher Rosen of The Huffington Post all reiterate the fact that Rue and Thresh are described in The Hunger Games as having dark brown skin, as well as Collins' assertion that they were intended to be depicted as African Americans.[134][138][139] Adewunmi remarked that "it comes to this: if the casting of Rue, Thresh and Cinna has left you bewildered and upset, consider two things. One: you may be a racist  congrats! Two: you definitely lack basic reading comprehension. Mazel tov!"[139] Erik Kain of Forbes saw the controversy as a way to appreciate the value of free speech. He states that while society may never be free of racism, "racist comments made on Facebook and Twitter quickly become public record. Aggregations of these comments, like the Jezebel piece, expose people for what they are. Sure, many hide under the cloak of anonymity, but many others cannot or choose not to. And as the internet becomes more civilized and its denizens more accountable, this sort of thing carries more and more weight."[135] Amandla Stenberg responded to the controversy with the following statement: "As a fan of the books, I feel fortunate to be part of The Hunger Games family... It was an amazing experience; I am proud of the film and my performance. I want to thank all of my fans and the entire Hunger Games community for their support and loyalty."[140] Dayo Okeniyi was quoted saying "I think this is a lesson for people to think before they tweet" and "It's sad... We could now see where society is today. But I try not to think about stuff like that."[141]A number of critics expressed disappointment in Jennifer Lawrence's casting as Katniss because her weight was not representative of a character who has suffered a life of starvation. Manohla Dargis, in her review of the film for The New York Times stated "[a] few years ago Ms. Lawrence might have looked hungry enough to play Katniss, but now, at 21, her seductive, womanly figure makes a bad fit for a dystopian fantasy about a people starved into submission."[142] Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter said that in certain scenes, Lawrence displays "lingering baby fat."[143] These remarks have been rebuked by a number of journalists for pushing unrealistic body image expectations for women.[144] L.V. Anderson of Slate states that "[j]ust as living in a world with abundant calories does not automatically make everyone fat, living in a dystopian world like Panem with sporadic food access would not automatically make everyone skinny. Some bodies, I daresay, would be even bigger than Lawrence's."[145] Since none of Lawrence's male co-stars have come under the same scrutiny, Anderson concludes complaints about Lawrence's weight are inherently sexist.[145] MTV asked for responses from audiences on the controversy and reported that most found criticism of Lawrence's weight "misguided."[146] One response pointed to Collins' physical description of Katniss in The Hunger Games novel which reads "I stand straight, and while I'm thin, I'm strong. The meat and plants from the woods combined with the exertion it took to get them have given me a healthier body than most of those I see around me."[147] Los Angeles Times writer Alexandra Le Tellier commented that "[t]he sexist commentary along with the racist barbs made by so-called fans are as stomach-churning as the film's cultural commentary, which, in part, shines a light on the court of public opinion and its sometimes destructive power to determine someone else's fate."[148]Screening of The Hunger Games has been delayed indefinitely in Vietnam.[149] The film was to be released on March 30, 2012, but, according to a member of the Vietnamese National Film Board, the Board considers the film to be too violent and unanimously voted for the indefinite delay. It is, in fact, banned.[150]There have also been comparisons between The Hunger Games premise of children killing each other, and the child soldiers of the Lord's Resistance Army led by Joseph Kony in the midst of the Kony 2012 campaign.[151][152][153]Interpretations of the film's themes and messages have been widely discussed among critics and other commentators. In his review for The Washington Times, Peter Suderman expressed that "[m]aybe it's a liberal story about inequality and the class divide. Maybe it's a libertarian epic about the evils of authoritarian government. Maybe it's a feminist revision on the sci-fi action blockbuster. Maybe it's a bloody satire of reality television", but concludes the film only proposes these theories and brings none of them to a reasonable conclusion.[167]Reviewers and critics have differing views on whether the film represents feminist issues. Historically, among the "top 200 worldwide box-office hits ever ($350million and up), not one has been built around a female action star."[168] Manohla Dargis sees Katniss Everdeen as a female hero following in the lineage of "archetypal figures in the literature of the American West" such as Natty Bumppo, as well as characters portrayed by American actors such as John Wayne and Clint Eastwood.[169] Katniss is also seen as defying normative gender roles: she exhibits both "masculine" and "feminine" traits equally.[169] Dargis also notes that Katniss is a female character with significant agency: "Katniss is a fantasy figure, but partly what makes her powerful  and, I suspect, what makes her so important to a lot of girls and women  is that she's one of the truest feeling, most complex female characters to hit American movies in a while. She isn't passive, she isn't weak, and she isn't some random girl. She's active, she's strong and she's the girl who motivates the story."[169] Similarly, Shelley Bridgeman of The New Zealand Herald wrote that because the characteristics of "athleticism, strength, courageousness and prowess at hunting" are not given to a male protagonist, but to Katniss, her character is an abrupt departure from the stereotypical depiction of women as being innately passive or helpless.[170] Mahvesh Murad of the The Express Tribune said that the film's triumph is "a young female protagonist with agency", comparing her with Joss Whedon's Buffy Summers.[171]Kate Heartfield of the Ottawa Citizen does not share the view that the film, or the books on which it is based, is feminist. Despite being a blockbuster film with a female lead possessing masculine characteristics, Heartfield argues, The Hunger Games fails to challenge patriarchal or orthodox paradigms.[172] As evidence for her claim, Heartsfield points to the fact that Katniss is torn between her feelings for two male love interests, a trait she shares with Bella Swan of the The Twilight Saga, with whom she is often compared and contrasted.[172] Heartfield asserts that while Katniss may be an exceptional character, "she isn't threatening to our social order. There's no controversy over women taking up archery or martial arts. There is controversy these days in the United States over access to birth control. The relationship between female power in The Hunger Games and the real feminist battles of 2012 is comfortably remote."[172]The film has drawn varying interpretations for its political overtones, including arguments in favor of left-wing, right-wing, and libertarian viewpoints. Bob Burnett of The Huffington Post observed the film displays a general distrust of government, regardless of the audience's political party affiliation.[173] Steven Zeitchik and Emily Rome, in the Dallas Morning News, also stated that some viewers formed an opinion about The Hunger Games as a parable of the Occupy Wall Street activity.[174] The Huffington Post reported that Penn Badgley, a supporter of Occupy Wall Street, saw the film as a social commentary on the movement.[175] Burnett also states that "Collins doesn't use the terms 1percent and 99percent, but it's clear that those in the Capitol are members of the 1percent and everyone in the Panem districts is part of the 99percent".[173]Steven Zeitchik and Emily Rome, in the Los Angeles Times and the Dallas Morning News reported that, among other disparate interpretations, some viewers saw The Hunger Games as a Christian allegory.[176][177] Jeffrey Weiss of the Star Tribune has remarked on what he saw as the intentional absence of religion in The Hunger Games universe, and has commented that whilst the stories contain no actual religion, people are "find[ing] aspects that represent their own religious values" within it.[178] Donald Brake from The Washington Times, as well as Andy Langford, senior pastor at Central United Methodist Church in Concord, North Carolina and his daughter, Ann G. L. Duncan, a pastor at Hoyle Memorial United Methodist Church in Shelby, North Carolina, wrote that the film has Christian themes, such as that of self-sacrifice, which is found in Katniss' substitution for her younger sister, analogous to the sacrifice of Jesus as a substitute for the atonement of sins.[179][180] Brake, as well as another reviewer, Amy Simpson, both find that the film also revolves around the theme of hope, which is exemplified in the "incorruptible goodness of Katniss' sister, Primrose."[181] She also describes that Peeta Mellark is "a Christ figure" in the film.[182] Similar to the events in the passion, death, and resurrection of Jesus, in the Games, Peeta is stabbed and left for dead after saving Katniss' lifetaking the wound that was initially meant for herand is then buried in the ground and placed in a cave for three days before emerging with a new lease on life.[183] Moreover, the Christian image of the Bread of Life is used throughout The Hunger Games; in the film, Peeta shows up "bearing a warm loaf of bread," and Katniss slowly comes "back to life."[184] A news video starring Jonathan Morris aired on Fox News discussed the religious themes in the film further.[185] In addition, many pastors have written Bible studies discussing the Christian allegories in the film.[186][187]On August 8, 2011, while still shooting the film, Lionsgate announced that a film adaptation of the second novel in The Hunger Games trilogy, The Hunger Games: Catching Fire, is scheduled to be released on November 22, 2013.[188] In November 2011, Lionsgate entered negotiations with screenwriter Simon Beaufoy to adapt the novel for screen, since the post-production schedule for The Hunger Games was too crowded for Ross and Collins to adapt the next film as originally planned.[189] The Hunger Games: Catching Fire will begin production in the summer of 2012.[190] Gary Ross will not return for Catching Fire, and instead Francis Lawrence will direct.[191][192][193][194] On May 6, 2012, it was reported that Michael Arndt was in talks to re-write the script for Catching Fire.[195] Arndt officially signed on as the new script writer on May 24, 2012.[196]In July 2012, release dates were confirmed for two films based on the last book Mockingjay. The Hunger Games: Mockingjay, Part 1 will be released November 21, 2014 and The Hunger Games: Mockingjay, Part 2 will be released November 20, 2015.[197] Lawrence, Hutcherson, Hemsworth, and Harrelson have all signed on to the whole franchise.[3][198] The Hunger Games: Catching Fire began filming September 10, 2012.[199]March 12, 2012(2012-03-12) (Premiere)March 22, 2012(2012-03-22) (Philippines)March 23, 2012(2012-03-23) (United States)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Casting
3.2 Filming
3.3 Music

3.3.1 Soundtrack
3.3.2 Score



3.1 Casting3.2 Filming3.3 Music

3.3.1 Soundtrack
3.3.2 Score

3.3.1 Soundtrack3.3.2 Score4 Reception

4.1 Critical response
4.2 Pre-release tracking
4.3 Box office
4.4 Home media
4.5 Precedents in film and literature
4.6 Controversies
4.7 Accolades

4.1 Critical response4.2 Pre-release tracking4.3 Box office4.4 Home media4.5 Precedents in film and literature4.6 Controversies4.7 Accolades5 Themes

5.1 Feminism
5.2 Politics
5.3 Religion

5.1 Feminism5.2 Politics5.3 Religion6 Sequels7 References8 External links3.1 Casting3.2 Filming3.3 Music

3.3.1 Soundtrack
3.3.2 Score

3.3.1 Soundtrack3.3.2 Score3.3.1 Soundtrack3.3.2 Score4.1 Critical response4.2 Pre-release tracking4.3 Box office4.4 Home media4.5 Precedents in film and literature4.6 Controversies4.7 Accolades5.1 Feminism5.2 Politics5.3 ReligionJennifer Lawrence as Katniss Everdeen[15]Josh Hutcherson as Peeta Mellark[16]Liam Hemsworth as Gale Hawthorne[16]Woody Harrelson as Haymitch Abernathy[17]Elizabeth Banks as Effie Trinket[18]Lenny Kravitz as Cinna[19]Stanley Tucci as Caesar Flickerman[20]Donald Sutherland as President Coriolanus Snow[21]Wes Bentley as Seneca Crane[22]Amandla Stenberg as Rue[23]Alexander Ludwig as Cato[24]Isabelle Fuhrman as Clove[24]Jack Quaid as MarvelLeven Rambin as GlimmerToby Jones as Claudius TemplesmithDayo Okeniyi as Thresh[23]Jacqueline Emerson as FoxfacePaula Malcomson as Mrs. EverdeenWillow Shields as Primrose EverdeenOfficial websiteThe Hunger Games at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Hunger Games at AllRoviThe Hunger Games at Box Office MojoThe Hunger Games at Rotten TomatoesThe Hunger Games at MetacriticThe Hunger Games at The NumbersIron Man is a 2008 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name. It is the first installment to be released in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Directed by Jon Favreau, the film stars Robert Downey, Jr. as Tony Stark, an industrialist and master engineer who builds a powered exoskeleton and becomes the technologically advanced superhero Iron Man. Gwyneth Paltrow plays his personal assistant Pepper Potts, Terrence Howard plays military liaison James Rhodes, and Jeff Bridges plays Stark Industries executive Obadiah Stane.The film was in development since 1990 at Universal Pictures, 20th Century Fox, and New Line Cinema, before Marvel Studios reacquired the rights in 2006. Marvel put the project in production as its first self-financed film, with Paramount Pictures as its distributor. Favreau signed on as director, aiming for a naturalistic feel, and he chose to shoot the film primarily in California, rejecting the East Coast setting of the comics to differentiate the film from numerous superhero films set in New York City-esque environments. During filming, the actors were free to create their own dialogue because pre-production was focused on the story and action. Rubber and metal versions of the armors, created by Stan Winston's company, were mixed with computer-generated imagery to create the title character. Hasbro and Sega sold merchandise, and product placement deals were made with Audi, Burger King, LG and 7-Eleven.Reviews were extremely positive, particularly praising Downey's performance.[2] The American Film Institute selected the film as one of the ten best of the year. Downey, Favreau, and Paltrow returned for the sequel Iron Man 2, released on May 7, 2010. Iron Man shares the same universe with other films that have been independently produced by Marvel Studios. Downey made a cameo appearance as Stark in The Incredible Hulk and starred as the character again in the 2012 crossover film The Avengers. Downey will reprise the role for a fifth time in another sequel, Iron Man 3, which is set for release on May 3, 2013.Playboy and genius Tony Stark, who has inherited the defense contractor Stark Industries from his father, is in Afghanistan with his friend and military liaison, Lieutenant Colonel James Rhodes to demonstrate the new "Jericho" missile. Stark is critically wounded in an ambush and imprisoned in a cave by the terrorist group the Ten Rings. An electromagnet grafted into Stark's chest by fellow captive Yinsen keeps the shrapnel that wounded him from reaching his heart and killing him. Ten Rings leader Raza places the prisoners into a workshop, promising Stark freedom in exchange for building a Jericho missile for the group, but Tony and Yinsen agree Raza will not keep his word.Stark and Yinsen secretly build a powerful electric generator called an arc reactor, to power Stark's electromagnet, and then begin to build a suit of armor to escape. The Ten Rings attack the workshop when they discover what Stark is doing. Yinsen sacrifices himself to divert them while Stark's suit powers up. The armored Stark eliminates the terrorists, then returns to the cave to rescue Yinsen. However, Yinsen is mortally wounded; as he dies he implores Stark not to continue wasting his life. An enraged Stark burns the terrorist's munitions and flies away, only to crash in the desert, destroying the suit. After being rescued by Rhodes, Stark returns home and announces that he has suspended production on his company until they can make peaceful technology; thus no more weapons will be made. In his home workshop, Stark builds an improved version of his suit, as well as a more powerful arc reactor for his chest. At the Stark Industries building, Tony works on a larger version of the arc reactor which he believes may be able to supply tremendous amounts of clean energy, but Obadiah Stane, his father's old partner and the company's manager, advises Stark that this may bankrupt Stark Industries and ruin his father's legacy.At Stark's first public appearance after his return, reporter Christine Everhart informs him that Stark Industries weapons, including the Jericho, were recently delivered to the Ten Rings and are being used to attack Yinsen's home village, Gulmira. Stark also learns that Stane is trying to replace him as head of the company. Enraged, Stark dons his new armor and flies to Afghanistan, where he saves Yinsen's village and delivers a devastating blow to the Ten Rings. While flying home, Stark is pursued and shot at by two F-22 Raptor fighter jets. He phones Rhodes and reveals his secret identity in an attempt to end the attack. Meanwhile, the Ten Rings gather the pieces of Stark's prototype suit and meet with Stane, who subdues Raza with a sonic device and has the rest of the group eliminated. He has a new suit reverse engineered from the wreckage. Seeking to find any other weapons delivered to the Ten Rings, Stark sends assistant Virginia "Pepper" Potts to hack into the company computer system from Stane's office. She discovers Stane has been supplying the terrorists and hired the Ten Rings to kill Stark, but the group reneged. Potts later meets with agent Phil Coulson of S.H.I.E.L.D., the Strategic Homeland Intervention, Enforcement and Logistics Division, a counter-terrorism agency, to inform him of Stane's activities.Stane's scientists cannot duplicate Stark's arc reactor, so Stane ambushes Stark at home, using his sonic device to paralyze him and take his arc reactor. Left to die, Stark manages to crawl to his lab and plug in his original reactor. Potts and several S.H.I.E.L.D. agents attempt to arrest Stane, but he dons his suit and attacks them. Stark fights Stane, but is overmatched without his new reactor to run his suit at full capacity. Stark lures Stane atop the Stark Industries building and instructs Potts to overload the large arc reactor there. This unleashes a massive electrical surge that knocks Stane unconscious, causing him and his armor to fall into the exploding reactor, killing him.The next day, the press has dubbed the armored hero "Iron Man". Agent Coulson gives Stark a cover story to explain the events of the night and Stane's death. At a press conference, Stark begins giving the cover story, but then announces that he is Iron Man, prompting the reporters to swarm the stage and ask more questions.In a post-credits scene, S.H.I.E.L.D. Director Nick Fury visits Stark at home, and, noting that Iron Man is not "the only superhero in the world", says he wants to discuss the "Avengers Initiative".What I usually hate about these [superhero] movies [is] when suddenly the guy that you were digging turns into Dudley Do-Right, and then you're supposed to buy into all his 'Let's go do some good!' That Eliot Ness-in-a-cape-type thing. What was really important to me was to not have him change so much that he's unrecognizable. When someone used to be a schmuck and they're not anymore, hopefully they still have a sense of humor.[8]Clark Gregg appears as Agent Coulson of S.H.I.E.L.D..[21] Samuel L. Jackson appears as the agency's head, Nick Fury, following the credits. Jackson's face was used, with his permission, as the model for that of the version of Nick Fury in Marvel's Ultimate Marvel imprint.[22] Other cameos include Iron Man co-creator Stan Lee (whom Stark mistakes for Hugh Hefner at a party),[23] and director Jon Favreau as Stark's bodyguard and chauffeur, Happy Hogan.[7] Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave guitarist Tom Morello, who provides additional guitar music for the film, has a brief cameo as a terrorist guard.[24] Jim Cramer, star of CNBC's Mad Money appears as himself, commenting on the investment opportunities ("Sell, sell, sell") of Stark Industries.[25] Rapper Ghostface Killah had had a cameo in a scene where Stark briefly stays in Dubai while returning to Afghanistan, but it was cut from the theatrical release for pacing reasons.[26] Frontline's Will Lyman provides the voiceover backstory of Stark in the film's opening award ceremony.In April 1990, Universal Studios bought the rights to develop Iron Man for the big screen.[27] Stuart Gordon was to direct Universal's low-budget film.[9] By February 1996, 20th Century Fox acquired the rights from Universal.[28] In January 1997, actor Nicolas Cage expressed interest in being cast for the lead role,[29] and in September 1998, actor Tom Cruise had expressed interest in producing as well as starring in the film debut of Iron Man.[30] Jeff Vintar and Iron Man co-creator Stan Lee co-wrote a story which Vintar adapted into a screenplay. Jeffrey Caine (GoldenEye) rewrote Vintar's script.[31] Director Quentin Tarantino was approached in October 1999 to write and direct Iron Man.[32] With no deal made, Fox eventually sold the rights to New Line Cinema the following December.[33] By July 2000, the film was being written for the studio[34] by Ted Elliott, Terry Rossio,[31] and Tim McCanlies.[35] McCanlies's script used the idea of a Nick Fury cameo to set up his own film.[31] New Line entered talks with Joss Whedon, a fan of the character Iron Man, in June 2001 for the possibility of the director taking the helm.[36] In December 2002, McCanlies had turned in a completed script.[37]"We worked with Michael Crichton's researchers to find a grounded realistic way to deal with the suit. The idea was he needed the suit to stay alive. He's the same guy we used with Spider-Man 2 to come up with Doc Ock's inhibitor chips and what the arms are made of and how they work. [...] Mandarin was an Indonesian terrorist who masqueraded as a rich playboy who Tony knew."In December 2004, the studio attached director Nick Cassavetes to the project for a target 2006 release.[39] After two years of unsuccessful development, and the deal with Cassavetes falling through, New Line Cinema returned the film rights to Marvel. Screenplay drafts had been written by Alfred Gough, Miles Millar and David Hayter, but they were not retained. New Line's script pitted Iron Man against his father Howard Stark, who becomes War Machine.[40] In November 2005, Marvel Studios worked to start development from scratch,[41] and announced it as their first independent feature, as Iron Man was their only major character not depicted in live action.[6] According to associate producer Jeremy Latcham, "we went after about 30 writers and they all passed", saying they were uninterested in the project due to both the relative obscurity of Iron Man and being a production solely by Marvel. Even the rewrites when the film had a script lead to many refusals.[42]Len Wiseman had been in negotiations to direct,[43] before Jon Favreau was hired as in April 2006, with Arthur Marcum and Matt Holloway writing the script.[44] Mark Fergus and Hawk Ostby worked separately, with Favreau compiling both team's scripts,[45] and the script received a polish by John August.[46] Comic book staff Mark Millar, Brian Michael Bendis, Joe Quesada, Tom Brevoort, Axel Alonso, and Ralph Macchio were also called upon by Favreau to give advice on the script.[47]Favreau had wanted to work with Marvel producer Avi Arad on another film after the Daredevil adaptation.[6] Favreau celebrated getting the job by going on a diet, and lost seventy pounds.[9] The director found the opportunity to create a politically ambitious "ultimate spy movie" in Iron Man, citing inspiration from Tom Clancy, James Bond, and RoboCop.[48] Favreau also described his approach as similar to an independent film, "[i]f Robert Altman had directed Superman",[6] and also cited Batman Begins as an inspiration.[49] He wanted to make Iron Man a story of an adult man literally reinventing himself, and realizing the world is far more complex than he believes.[50] Favreau changed the Vietnam War origin of the character to Afghanistan, as he did not want to do a period piece.[10]Choosing a villain was difficult, because Favreau felt Iron Man's archnemesis, the Mandarin, would not feel realistic, especially after Mark Millar gave his opinion on the script.[47] He felt only in a sequel, with an altered tone, would the fantasy of the Mandarin's rings be appropriate.[51] The decision to push him into the background is comparable to Sauron in The Lord of the Rings,[49] or Palpatine in Star Wars.[51] Favreau also wanted Iron Man to face a giant enemy. The switch from Mandarin to Obadiah Stane was done after Bridges was cast.[26] Stane had originally been intended to become a villain in the sequel.[47] The Crimson Dynamo was also a villain in early drafts in the script.[7] Favreau felt it was important to include intentional inside references for fans of the comics, such as giving the two fighter jets that attack Iron Man the call signs of "Whiplash 1" and "Whiplash 2," a reference to the comic book villain Whiplash, and including Captain America's shield in Stark's workshop.[52]The post-closing-credits sequence that introduces Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury was written by comics writer Brian Michael Bendis.[53] Favreau, director of the Iron Man movies, describes in his article how Elon Musk (who is the founder of SpaceX and Tesla) was the inspiration for Favreau's film depiction of genius billionaire Tony Stark.[54]Production was based in the former Hughes Company soundstages in Playa Vista, Los Angeles, California.[55] Favreau rejected the East Coast setting of the comic books because many superhero films had already been set there.[10] Howard Hughes was one of the inspirations for the comic book, and the filmmakers acknowledged the coincidence that they would film Iron Man creating the flying Mark III where the Hughes H-4 Hercules was built.[14]Filming began on March 12, 2007,[56] with the first few weeks spent on Stark's captivity in Afghanistan.[57] The cave where Stark is imprisoned was a 150- to 200-yard (150200 m) long set, which had movable forks in the caverns to allow greater freedom for the film's crew.[10] Production designer J. Michael Riva saw footage of a Taliban fighter in Afghanistan, and saw the cold breath as he spoke: realizing remote caves are actually very cold, Riva placed an air conditioning system in the set. He also sought Downey's advice about makeshift objects in prison, such as a sock being used to make tea.[14] Afterwards, Stark's capture was filmed at Lone Pine, and other exterior scenes in Afghanistan were filmed at Olancha Sand Dunes, where the crew endured two days of 40 to 60 mile per hour (60 to 100km/h) winds.[14]Filming at Edwards Air Force Base began in mid-April,[58] and wrapped on May 2.[59] Exterior shots of Stark's home were digitally composited on footage of Point Dume in Malibu,[26] while the interior was built at Playa Vista, where Favreau and Riva aimed to make Stark's home look less futuristic and more "grease monkey".[14] Filming concluded on June 25, 2007 at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nevada.[60] Favreau, a newcomer to action films, remarked, "I'm shocked that I [was] on schedule. I thought that there were going to be many curveballs". He hired "people who are good at creating action", so "the human story [felt] like it belongs to the comic book genre".[9]There was much improvisation in dialogue scenes, because the script was not completed when filming began (the filmmakers had focused on the story making sense and planning the action). Favreau acknowledged that improvisation would make the film feel more natural. Some scenes were shot with two cameras to capture lines said on the spot. Multiple takes were done, as Downey wanted to try something new each time.[26] It was Downey's idea to have Stark hold a news conference on the floor,[9] and he created the speech Stark makes when demonstrating the Jericho weapon.[5]Brian Michael Bendis wrote three pages of dialogue for the Nick Fury cameo scene, with the filmmakers choosing the best lines for filming.[47] The cameo was filmed with a skeleton crew in order to keep it a secret, but rumors appeared on the Internet only days later. Marvel Studios's Kevin Feige subsequently ordered the scene removed from all preview prints in order to maintain the surprise and keep fans guessing.[61]Favreau wanted the film to be believable by showing the construction of the suit in its three stages.[10] Stan Winston, a fan of the comic book, and his company built metal and rubber versions of the armors. They had previously worked on Favreau's Zathura.[14] Favreau's main concern with the effects was whether the transition between the computer-generated and practical costumes would be too obvious.[62] Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) was hired to create the bulk of the visual effects with additional work being completed by The Orphanage and The Embassy; Favreau trusted ILM after seeing Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End and Transformers.[14]The Mark I design was intended to look like it was built from spare parts: particularly, the back is less armored than the front, as Stark would use his resources to make a forward attack. It also foreshadows the design of Stane's armor. A single 90-pound (41kg) version was built, causing concern when a stuntman fell over inside it. Both the stuntman and the suit were unscathed. The armor was also designed to only have its top half worn at times.[14] The Embassy created a digital version of the Mark I.[63] Stan Winston Studios built a 10-foot (3.0m), 800-pound (360kg) animatronic version of the comic character "Iron Monger" (Obadiah Stane),[14] a name which Obadiah Stane calls Tony Stark and himself earlier in the film as a reference, but is never actually used for the suit itself. The animatronic required five operators for the arm, and was built on a gimbal to simulate walking.[14] A scale model was used for the shots of it being built.[26]The Mark II resembles an airplane prototype, with visible flaps.[26] Iron Man comic book artist Adi Granov designed the Mark III with illustrator Phil Saunders.[64] Granov's designs were the primary inspiration for the film's design, and he came on board the film after he recognized his work on Jon Favreau's MySpace page.[49] Saunders streamlined Granov's concept art, making it stealthier and less cartoonish in its proportions.[14] Sometimes, Downey would only wear the helmet, sleeves and chest of the costume over a motion capture suit.[14] For shots of the Mark III flying, it was animated to look realistic by taking off slowly, and landing quickly. To generate shots of Iron Man and the F-22 Raptors battling, cameras were flown in the air to provide reference for physics, wind and frost on the lenses.[65] For further study of the physics of flying, skydivers were filmed in a vertical wind tunnel.[66]Phil Saunders created concept art for the War Machine armor and said that it was originally intended to be used in the film but was "cut from the script about halfway through pre-production." Saunders said that the War Machine armor "was going to be called the Mark IV armor and would have had weaponized swap-out parts that would be worn over the original Mark III armor," and that it "would have been worn by Tony Stark in the final battle sequence."[67]Composer Ramin Djawadi is an Iron Man fan, and still has issues of the comic from the late 1970s. Through his older brother, Amir, he is also into heavy metal music since the early 1990s. While he normally composes after watching an assembly cut, Djawadi began work after seeing the teaser trailer. Favreau clearly envisioned a focus on "heavy" guitar in the score, and Djawadi composed the music on that instrument before arranging it for orchestra. The composer said Downey's performance inspired the several Iron Man themes (for his different moods), as well as Stark's playboy leitmotif. Djawadi's favorite of the Iron Man themes is the "kickass" because of its "rhythmic pattern that is a hook on its own. Very much like a machine." The other themes are "not so much character based, but rather plot based that carry you through the movie".[68] Guitarist Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave, who has a brief cameo in the film as a guard, contributed additional guitar work to the movie's soundtrack.The premiere was held at the Greater Union theater at George Street, Sydney, on April 14, 2008.[69] The film was released worldwide except for Japan between April 30 and May 7, 2008, with Japan to receive the film in September 2008.[70]Marvel and Paramount modeled their marketing campaign for Iron Man on that of Transformers.[71] Sega released a video game based on the film, which included other iterations of the character.[72] A 30-second spot for the film aired during a Super Bowl XLII break.[73] 6,400 7-Eleven stores in the United States helped promote the film, and LG Group also made a deal with Paramount.[71] Hasbro created figures of armors from the film, as well as Titanium Man (who appears in the video game) and the armor from the World War Hulk comics.[74]Worldwide, Burger King and Audi promoted the film. Jon Favreau was set to direct a commercial for the fast-food chain, as Michael Bay did for Transformers.[71] In the film, Tony Stark drives an Audi R8, and also has an "American cheeseburger" from Burger King after his rescue from Afghanistan, as part of the studio's product placement deal with the respective companies. Three other vehicles, the Audi S6 sedan, Audi S5 sports coupe and the Audi Q7 SUV, also appear in the film.[75] Audi created a tie-in website, as General Motors did for Transformers.[71] Oracle Corporation also promoted the film on its site.[76] Estimates for the cost of marketing Iron Man ranged from US$50 to $75million.[77] Iron Man received extremely positive reviews from film critics. On May 1, 2008, the film was identified as the "best-reviewed film of the year so far" by Jen Yamato of review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, with the site reporting at that time the film had received a rating of 95% based on 107 reviews and this rating has held its place as of January 2010.[2][78] The film currently holds a score of 94% based on 238 reviews.[79] Metacritic gave the film normalized average score of 79%, based on 38 reviews.[80]Among the major trade journals, Todd McCarthy in Variety called the film an "expansively entertaining special effects extravaganza" with "fresh energy and stylistic polish",[81] while Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter praised the film while nonetheless finding "disappointment [in] a climatic [sic] battle between different Iron Man prototypes [...] how did Tony's nemesis learn how to use the suit?"[82] In one of the first major-daily newspaper reviews, Frank Lovece of Newsday lauded the film's "emotional truth [...] pitch-perfect casting and plausibly rendered super-science" that made it "faithful to the source material while updating it  and recognizing what's made that material so enduring isn't just the high-tech cool of a man in a metal suit, but the human condition that got him there".[83] A. O. Scott of The New York Times called the film "an unusually good superhero picture. Or at least  since it certainly has its problems  a superhero movie that's good in unusual ways."[84]Among the specialty press, Garth Franklin of Dark Horizons commended the "impressive sets and mechanics that combine smoothly with relatively seamless CG", and said, "Robert Downey Jr., along with director Jon Favreau [...] help this rise above formula. The result is something that, whilst hardly original or groundbreaking, is nevertheless refreshing in its earnestness to avoid dark dramatic stylings in favor of an easy-going, crowd-pleasing action movie with a sprinkle of anti-war and redemption themes".[85] IGN's Todd Gilchrist recognized Downey as "the best thing" in a film that "functions on autopilot, providing requisite story developments and character details to fill in this default 'origin story' while the actors successfully breathe life into their otherwise conventional roles".[86]Among major metropolitan weeklies, David Edelstein of New York magazine called the film "a shapely piece of mythmaking [...] Favreau doesn't go in for stylized comic-book frames, at least in the first half. He gets real with it  you'd think you were watching a military thriller",[87] while conversely, David Denby of The New Yorker put forth a negative review, claiming "a slightly depressed, going-through-the-motions feel to the entire show [...] Gwyneth Paltrow, widening her eyes and palpitating, can't do much with an antique role as Stark's girl Friday, who loves him but can't say so; Terrence Howard, playing a military man who chases around after Stark, looks dispirited and taken for granted".[88] Looking at the sociocultural aspects of the film, Cristobal Giraldez Catalan at Bright Lights Film Journal argues that, "Iron Man is far more than playboy fantasy; it is American foreign policy realized without context....Iron Man, with narrative and directorial precision, once again provides the high-fidelity misogyny and anti-Muslim rhetoric Hollywood is known for."[89]In a poll by the website Rotten Tomatoes in 2010, Iron Man was ranked among the best films of its genre, losing only to Persepolis.Roger Ebert and Richard Corliss named Iron Man as among their favorite films of 2008.[90][91]In its opening weekend, Iron Man grossed $98,618,668 in 4,105 theaters in the United States and Canada, ranking number one at the box office,[92] giving it the 11th-biggest opening weekend,[93] ninth-widest release in terms of theaters,[94] and the third-highest-grossing opening weekend of 2008 behind Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull and The Dark Knight. It grossed $35.2million on its first day, giving it the 13th-biggest opening day.[95] Iron Man had the second-best premiere for a non-sequel, behind Spider-Man. It had the fourth-biggest opening for a superhero movie.[96] Iron Man was also the number-one film in the United States and Canada in its second weekend, grossing $51.1million,[92] giving it the 12th-best second weekend and the fifth-best for a non-sequel.[97] On June 18, 2008 Iron Man became the first movie of 2008 to pass the $300million mark for the domestic box office.[98][99] As of July 2009[update], Iron Man has grossed $585,174,222 worldwide, $318,412,101 in the United States and Canada and $266,762,121 in other territories.[1] The film was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc on September 30, 2008, in North America and October 27, 2008 in Europe.[100] DVD sales were very successful, selling over 4 million copies the first week and generating a gross over $93million USD.[101][102] There were a total of 9 million copies sold and an accumulated total sales of over $160million (not including Blu-ray).[101]For the home releases of the film, the image on the newspaper Stark reads before he announces he is Iron Man had to be altered because of amateur photographer Ronnie Adams filing a lawsuit against Paramount and Marvel for using his on-location spy photo in the scene.[103]A Wal-Mart-exclusive release included a preview of Iron Man: Armored Adventures.[104]The film is also scheduled to be collected in a 10-disc box set titled Marvel Cinematic Universe: Phase One  Avengers Assembled which will include all of the "Phase One" films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe.[105] However in September 2012, the release of the box set, which was scheduled on the same day as the Blu-ray release of The Avengers, was delayed until Q1 2013, due to a pending law suit over the suitcase used to package the collection.[106]Iron Man was selected by the American Film Institute as one of the ten best films of the year.[107] The film was nominated for the Academy Awards for Best Visual Effects and Best Sound Editing at the 81st Academy Awards, but lost to another Paramount film The Curious Case of Benjamin Button and The Dark Knight, respectively.[108][109] It was nominated for nine Saturn Awards,[110] winning Best Science Fiction Film, Best Director for Favreau and Best Actor for Downey.[111] In 2008, Iron Man was selected by Empire magazine as one of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time.[112] Tony Stark was also selected as one of The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time.[113] On their list of the 100 Greatest Fictional Characters, Fandomania.com ranked Iron Man at number 37.[114]It was nominated for Favorite Movie at the 2009 Kids' Choice Awards but lost to High School Musical 3: Senior Year.[115][116]In 2010, in anticipation of the release of Iron Man 2, Marvel Comics released a comic book adaptation of the film under the title Iron Man: I Am Iron Man! The two-issue miniseries featured bonus scenes not in the original movie.[117]The sequel, Iron Man 2, was released in the United States on May 7, 2010 with Jon Favreau and Robert Downey, Jr. returning as director and lead, respectively, with a screenplay by Justin Theroux. Don Cheadle replaces Terrence Howard in the role of Colonel Rhodes, who is also seen as War Machine. Also starring is Gwyneth Paltrow as Pepper Potts, Stark's romantic interest and personal assistant; Mickey Rourke as villain Ivan Vanko; Sam Rockwell as Justin Hammer, a business rival of Stark's; Samuel L. Jackson as SHIELD director Nick Fury.Disney, Marvel, and Paramount announced a May 3, 2013 release date for Iron Man 3.[118] Favreau said in December 2010 that he would not direct Iron Man 3, opting to direct Magic Kingdom instead.[119] Shane Black is scheduled to direct Iron Man 3,[120] from a screenplay by Drew Pearce. In mid-April 2012, producer Kevin Feige said Iron Man 3 would begin shooting in North Carolina "in five weeks".[121]May 2, 2008(2008-05-02)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Filming
3.3 Effects
3.4 Music

3.1 Development3.2 Filming3.3 Effects3.4 Music4 Release

4.1 Marketing
4.2 Critical reception
4.3 Box office
4.4 Home media
4.5 Awards
4.6 Comic book adaptation

4.1 Marketing4.2 Critical reception4.3 Box office4.4 Home media4.5 Awards4.6 Comic book adaptation5 Sequels

5.1 Iron Man 2
5.2 Iron Man 3

5.1 Iron Man 25.2 Iron Man 36 References7 External links3.1 Development3.2 Filming3.3 Effects3.4 Music4.1 Marketing4.2 Critical reception4.3 Box office4.4 Home media4.5 Awards4.6 Comic book adaptation5.1 Iron Man 25.2 Iron Man 3Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man
An industrialist, genius inventor, and consummate playboy, he is CEO of Stark Industries, a chief weapons manufacturer for the U.S. military. The son of a Manhattan Project engineer, Howard Stark, he is an engineering prodigy, having built a circuit board at four years old and an engine at six, as well as graduating summa cum laude from Massachusetts Institute of Technology at the age of 17. He takes charge of Stark Industries at the age of 21 from Stane, who had been in control of the company since Howard's death. Favreau had planned to cast a newcomer in the role,[3] but ultimately chose Downey (a fan of the comic)[4] because he felt the actor's past made him an appropriate choice for the part. "The best and worst moments of Robert's life have been in the public eye," the director explained. "He had to find an inner balance to overcome obstacles that went far beyond his career. That's Tony Stark. Robert brings a depth that goes beyond a comic book character who is having trouble in high school, or can't get the girl."[4] Favreau also felt Downey could make Stark a "likable asshole", but also depict an authentic emotional journey once he won over the audience.[5] Downey had an office next to Favreau during pre-production, which allowed him greater involvement in the screenwriting process.[6] He brought a deeper sense of humor to the film not present in previous drafts of the script.[7] He explained,Terrence Howard as Lt. Colonel James "Rhodey" Rhodes
A friend of Stark's, and the liaison between Stark Industries and the U.S. Air Force in the department of acquisitions, specifically weapons development. Favreau cast Howard because he felt he could play War Machine in a sequel.[10] Howard prepared for the role by visiting Nellis Air Force Base on March 16, 2007, where he ate with the pilots and observed HH-60 Pave Hawk rescue helicopters and F-22 Raptors.[11] While Rhodes is roguish in the comics after he met Stark, his earlier disciplinarian character forms a dynamic with Stark, and he is unsure whether or not Stark's actions are acceptable. "Rhodey is completely disgusted with the way Tony has lived his life, but at a certain point he realizes that perhaps there is a different way," Howard said. "Whose life is the right way; is it the strict military life, or the life of an independent?"[9] Howard and his father are Iron Man fans, partly because Rhodes was one of the few black superheroes when he was a child.[12] He was a Downey fan since he saw him in Weird Science, and they competed physically on set: "Robert and his competitive ass almost tore my shoulder trying to keep up with him. Because I'm 40 or 50 pounds heavier than him, so I'm in there lifting and I pushed up about 225 pounds [102 kg] and knocked it out 10 times. Robert wanted to go about 235 [106 kg], and he did it. So I'm going to push it up to about 245 [111 kg]. I took him out running and gave him some nice cramps. He couldn't walk after a couple of days."[13]Jeff Bridges as Obadiah Stane
Stark's business second-in-command and eventual antagonist. Bridges read the comics as a boy and liked Favreau's modern, realistic approach. He shaved his head and grew a gray beard for the role, which was something he had wanted to do for some time. Bridges googled the Book of Obadiah, and he was surprised to learn retribution is a major theme in that particular book of the Bible, something which Stane represents.[14] Many of Stane's scenes were cut out to focus more on Stark, but the writers felt Bridges's performance allowed the application of "less is more".[15]Gwyneth Paltrow as Pepper Potts
Stark's personal assistant and budding love interest. Paltrow asked Marvel to send her any comics that they would consider relevant to her understanding of the character, who she considered to be very smart, levelheaded, and grounded. She said she liked "the fact that there's a sexuality that's not blatant." Favreau wanted Potts' and Stark's relationship to be reminiscent of a 1940s comedy, something which Paltrow considered to be fun in a sexy, yet innocent way.[16]Shaun Toub as Yinsen
Stark's fellow captive. In the comics, Yinsen is a Chinese physicist, but in the film, he comes from an Afghan village called Gulmira, which is one of the aspects of the modernization of the Iron Man mythos for the movie.Faran Tahir as Raza
The leader of the Ten Rings. Tahir is a fan of the comics,[14] and wanted to bring humanity to the henchman. "I tried to find ways to show that although he may be the bad guy, there might be a moment or just a hint of vulnerability at times, where he hasn't made the right calculations or there's a certain amount of doubt. Jon was very receptive to that kind of layering."[17]Paul Bettany voices JARVIS
Stark's personal Artificial Intelligence computer program, which assists him in the construction and programming of the Iron Man suit. The name of the character is a reference to the comic book character Edwin Jarvis, Stark's butler. In Peter David's novelization of the film, Jarvis is revealed as an acronym for "Just A Rather Very Intelligent System".[18] Bettany did the part as a favor to Favreau (having worked with him on Wimbledon) and said he did not know what film he was recording the lines for during his two-hour recording session.[19]Leslie Bibb as Christine Everhart
A reporter for Vanity Fair. She is a minor character in the comics, where she works as a reporter for The Daily Bugle and has investigated Tony Stark.[20]Official websiteIron Man at the Internet Movie DatabaseIron Man (film) at the TCM Movie DatabaseIron Man at Rotten TomatoesIron Man at MetacriticIron Man at Box Office MojoIron Man at AllRoviIron Man at Marvel.comIron Man at That's (Marvel) EntertainmentBatman: The Dark Knight Returns is a two-part animated superhero film, an adaptation of the four-issue story arc The Dark Knight Returns by Frank Miller, printed in 1986, and a sequel to Batman: Year One. It was directed by Jay Oliva, who worked as a storyboard artist on Man of Steel, Batman: Year One and Batman: Under the Red Hood. Several previous Batman veterans will be involved in the film.[1][2] Part 1 was released on September 25, 2012, while Part 2 is set for release on January 29, 2013. It is the 15th film in the DC Universe Animated Original Movies line.Following the death of his protg Jason Todd, billionaire industrialist Bruce Wayne promises to retire from being Batman. Ten years later Gotham City is overrun with crime and terrorized by the Mutants: a gang led by the fearsome Mutant Leader. The now 55-year old Wayne maintains a friendship with 70-year old retiring police Commissioner James Gordon; Gordon is now aware that Wayne was Batman. Following Batman's disappearance, the Joker becomes catatonic and is held in Arkham Asylum.Arkham inmate Harvey Dent undergoes plastic surgery to repair his disfigured face and cure his Two-Face persona. He is declared sane but quickly goes into hiding following his release. Dent's disappearance, the news stories of the brutal crime epidemic throughout the city, and the memory of his parents' deaths cause Wayne to realize he cannot deny who he is, and he again becomes Batman. He brutally deals with serious crimes, one of which sees him rescue 13-year-old Carrie Kelley; but he struggles with the physical limitations of his age. The public reaction to his return and actions is divided, while Dent's psychologist Dr. Bartholomew Wolper blames Batman for creating the villains he fights.Dent resurfaces and threatens to blow up a building unless he receives a ransom. Batman defeats Dent's henchmen, but learns that the bombs will explode even if the ransom is paid, and realizes that Dent intends to kill himself. Batman disables one bomb while the other detonates harmlessly. He defeats Dent, who reveals that although his face was repaired, he only sees himself with a fully scarred face and cannot change who he is.Elsewhere, Kelley dresses as Robin and seeks out Batman. Meanwhile, Batman directly assaults a gathering of the Mutants with a tank-like Batmobile, incapacitating most of them. The Leader challenges Batman to a duel and Batman accepts to prove to himself that he can win. In his physical prime, the Mutant Leader almost kills Batman, but Kelley distracts the Leader, and Batman subdues him: the Leader and many members of his gang are later arrested. The injured Batman returns to the Batcave with Kelley and allows her to become the new Robin despite the protestations of his butler Alfred Pennyworth. Batman has Carrie disguise herself as a Mutant and lure the gang to a sewer outlet.At the Gotham City Police Department, the Mayor is murdered by the Leader during their negotiation. Gordon deliberately releases the Leader and provides a specific way out of the building that leads him to the sewer outlet. In front of the amassed Mutant gang, Batman fights the Leader in a mud pit: the mud slows down the Leader, removing his physical advantage. Batman wears down the Leader before ultimately crippling him. Seeing the Leader's defeat, the Mutants disband into smaller gangs: one gang becomes the "Sons of Batman", a violent vigilante group.In the epilogue, Batman's victory becomes public news and the city's inhabitants are inspired to stand up against crime. Gordon retires after meeting his anti-Batman successor Ellen Yindel. In Arkham, the television reports about Batman bring the Joker out of his catatonic state.IGN reviewer Joey Esposito gives the film a score of 7.5 out of 10. The reviewer praises the voice performances and animation. He complains that the Newscasters segments do not translate well to the screen and lack the thematic punch they have in the comic, making them extraneous at best. He says Batman's inner monologue fails to be dark and brooding, coming off instead as a bit cheesy. Though disappointed by the extra features on the Blu-ray release, he concludes the movie alone makes it worth buying.[5][6]Gil Kellerman of Collider.com praised the film overall but he too was let down by the extra features. He concluded that Weller did a good job voicing Batman, quickly making the audience forget about Robocop, although still not matching Kevin Conroy's performance. He eagerly awaits part 2.[7]Spencer Perry at SuperHeroHype enthusiastically describes the film as the best Batman film ever, giving it 9/10.[8]The AV Club gives it a B+.[9]September 25, 2012(2012-09-25) (Part 1)January 29, 2013(2013-01-29) (Part 2)1 Plot

1.1 Part 1

1.1 Part 12 Cast3 Crew4 Reception5 References6 External links1.1 Part 1Peter Weller  Bruce Wayne / Batman[3]Ariel Winter  Carrie Kelley / Robin[3]David Selby  Commissioner James Gordon[3]Wade Williams  Harvey Dent / Two-Face[3]Paget Brewster  Lana LangMaria Canals Barrera  Police Captain/Commissioner Ellen YindelMichael Emerson  Joker[3]Michael Jackson  Alfred PennyworthMichael McKean  Dr. Bartholomew Wolper[3]Gary Anthony Williams  Mutant Leader/ News Anchor[3]Mark Valley  SupermanRichard Doyle  Mayor of Gotham CityBruce Timm  Thomas WayneFrank Welker  Deputy Mayor Stevenson/Weather Man / TV AnnouncerConan O'Brien  David Endocrine[4]Grey DeLisle  Anchor CarlaDee Bradley Baker - Don/Fat Mutant / Additional VoicesRobin Atkin Downes - Oliver QueenJames Patrick Stuart - MurrayYuri Lowenthal - Son of BatmanGwendoline Yeo - Lola ChongTownsend Coleman - Morrie/CivilianDanny Jacobs - Officer MerkelCarlos Alazraqui - Hernando / TV HostCathy Cavadini - Joanie / Woman with Hot DogGreg Eagles - MackieMaurice LaMarche - Dr. Herbert Willing / News AnchorSam McMurray - Anchor TedJim Meskimen - General BriggsRob Paulsen - Rob / Jeff Adams / MuggerAndrea Romano - Woman / Police DispatchTara Strong - Michelle / Young Bruce Wayne / Kevin Ridley / Anchor Trish / Additional VoicesGary Anthony Sturgis - Silk / Other Spike / Young MutantJames Arnold Taylor - Mr. Hudson / Spud / Additional VoicesJim Ward - Femur's LawyerJim Wise - FemurAndrea Romano  Voice DirectorBatman: The Dark Knight Returns (film) at the Internet Movie DatabaseCasino Royale is the twenty-first film in the Eon Productions James Bond film series and the first to star Daniel Craig as fictional MI6 agent James Bond. Directed by Martin Campbell and written by Neal Purvis, Robert Wade and Paul Haggis, the film marks the third screen adaptation of Ian Fleming's 1953 novel of the same name. Casino Royale is set at the beginning of Bond's career as Agent 007, just as he is earning his licence to kill. After preventing a terrorist attack at Miami International Airport, Bond falls for Vesper Lynd, the treasury employee assigned to provide the money he needs to bankrupt terrorist financier Le Chiffre by beating him in a high-stakes poker game. The story arc continues in the following Bond film, Quantum of Solace (2008).Casino Royale reboots the series, establishing a new timeline and narrative framework not meant to precede or succeed any previous Bond film,[3][4] which allowed the film to show a less experienced and more vulnerable Bond[5] and for the first time in the series the character of Miss Moneypenny does not appear. Casting the film involved a widespread search for a new actor to portray James Bond, and significant controversy surrounded Craig when he was selected to succeed Pierce Brosnan in October 2005. Location filming took place in the Czech Republic, The Bahamas, Italy and the United Kingdom with interior sets built at Pinewood Studios. Although part of the storyline was set in Montenegro, no filming took place there. Casino Royale was produced by Eon Productions for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Columbia Pictures, making it the first Eon-produced Bond film to be co-produced by the latter studio.Casino Royale premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square on 14 November 2006. It received largely positive critical response, with reviewers highlighting Craig's performance and the reinvention of the character of Bond. It earned over $599million worldwide, becoming the highest-grossing James Bond film until the release of Skyfall in 2012.After killing a traitorous MI6 section chiefwho has been selling classified informationand the station chief's contact, James Bond gets his double-0 status. He then goes to Madagascar in pursuit of an international bomb-maker named Mollaka. After a parkour chase to an embassy, Bond kills his target and escapes by setting off an explosion. Searching through Mollaka's mobile phone, Bond discovers a text message, which he traces to Alex Dimitrios, an associate of banker and terrorist financier Le Chiffre. Le Chiffre's investments involve short-selling stock in successful companies and then engineering terrorist attacks to sink their share prices.Bond travels to the Bahamas where Dimitrios has a home and seduces his wife, Solange Dimitrios. After answering a phone call, Solange reveals that her husband is flying to Miami, so Bond leaves to pursue him. In Miami, 007 kills Dimitrios and follows Le Chiffre's henchman, Carlos, to Miami International Airport. There, Bond foils Le Chiffre's plan to destroy the prototype Skyfleet airliner.Left with a huge loss and under pressure to recoup his terrorist clients' money, Le Chiffre sets up a high-stakes Texas hold 'em tournament at the Casino Royale in Montenegro. Hoping that a defeat would force Le Chiffre to aid the British government in exchange for protection from his creditors, MI6 enters Bond into the tournament. On the train to Montenegro, Bond meets Vesper Lynd, a British Treasury agent whose role is to protect the government's interests, specifically the $10million buy-in; on his arrival at the hotel, Bond meets local MI6 contact Ren Mathis. Bond loses his initial stake and Vesper refuses to give him $5million to continue playing. Frustrated by his failure, Bond resolves to assassinate Le Chiffre. Before he can, a fellow player reveals himself as CIA agent Felix Leiter, who offers to stake Bond in exchange for custody of Le Chiffre. Back in the game, Bond begins to amass chips. Le Chiffre and his associates attempt to kill Bond by poisoning his drink, but he survives with the help of Vesper, wins the tournament, and the winnings are deposited into a Swiss bank account. Soon afterward, Le Chiffre abducts Vesper and uses her as bait to capture Bond.Le Chiffre tortures Bond for the bank account's password, but is interrupted by Mr. White, who kills him. Bond awakens in a hospital on Lake Como and has Mathis, whom Le Chiffre identified as a double agent, arrested. Bond admits to Vesper that he is in love with her, and posts his resignation to M. The couple go to Venice, where Bond learns that his winnings were never deposited in the Treasury's account. Realising that the suddenly absent Vesper was in the process of stealing them, he pursues her and the men to whom she gives the money into a building under renovation, which is being kept from sinking only by inflatable supports. A gunfight ensues and the supports are punctured. Bond kills the men and tries to rescue Vesper, but she locks herself in an iron-frame lift and allows herself to drown as the building sinks. Mr. White, watching from a nearby balcony, walks away with the money.Bond rejoins the service and learns that Vesper had a French-Algerian boyfriend who was kidnapped by the organisation behind Le Chiffre and Mr. White to blackmail her into co-operation, and that she agreed to deliver the money in exchange for saving Bond's life. Bond then discovers a text from Vesper with White's name and mobile phone number, which he uses to find White. After wounding and capturing White, he introduces himself: "The name's Bond  James Bond."Casino Royale includes a cameo by British entrepreneur Richard Branson (seen being frisked at Miami airport). The cameo was cut out of the in-flight versions shown on British Airways' in-flight entertainment systems, as was a shot of the Virgin Atlantic aircraft Branson supplied.[6]Casino Royale was previously produced as a 1954 television episode and a 1967 satirical film. Eon Productions gained the rights for Casino Royale in 1999 after Sony Pictures Entertainment exchanged them for MGM's rights to Spider-Man.[7] In March 2004, Neal Purvis and Robert Wade began writing a screenplay for Pierce Brosnan as Bond, aiming to bring back the flavour of Ian Fleming's original Bond novels.[8] Paul Haggis' main contribution was to rewrite the climax of the film. He explained, "the draft that was there was very faithful to the book and there was a confession, so in the original draft the character confessed and killed herself. She then sent Bond to chase after the villains; Bond chased the villains into the house. I don't know why but I thought that Vesper had to be in the sinking house and Bond has to want to kill her and then try and save her."[9]Director Quentin Tarantino expressed interest in directing an adaptation of Casino Royale,[10] although he did not follow this up with Eon. Tarantino also expressed interest in Casino Royale after Pulp Fiction. He claims to have worked behind the scenes with the Fleming family, and believed this was the reason why filmmakers finally went ahead with Casino Royale.[11] Tarantino also said, he would have set it in the 1950s, like the novel, would have filmed it in black-and-white and would have only made it with Pierce Brosnan as Bond. In February 2005, Martin Campbell was announced as the film's director.[12] Later in 2005, Sony led a consortium that purchased MGM, allowing Sony to gain distribution rights starting with the film.[13]Eon admitted that they had relied too heavily on CGI effects in the more recent films, particularly Die Another Day, and were keen to accomplish the stunts in Casino Royale "the old fashioned way".[14] In keeping with this drive for more realism, screenwriters Purvis, Wade and Haggis wanted the script to follow as closely as possible to the original 1953 novel, keeping Fleming's darker storyline and characterisation of Bond.[15]Casino Royale became the first Bond film to take its title from a Fleming novel or short story since 1987's The Living Daylights. It is also the first Bond film since then not to be adapted as a novelisation. Instead, a film tie-in edition of Fleming's original novel was published.[16]Pierce Brosnan had originally signed a deal for four films when he was cast in the role of James Bond. This was fulfilled with the production of Die Another Day in 2002. However, at this stage Brosnan was approaching his 50th birthday, and speculation began that the producers were seeking to replace him with a younger actor.[17] Brosnan officially announced he was stepping down in February 2005. At one point producer Michael G. Wilson claimed there was a list of over 200 names being considered for his replacement.[18] Croatian actor Goran Vinji auditioned for the role the same day as Craig, but was reportedly unable to master a British accent.[19] New Zealander Karl Urban was considered, but was unable to make the screen test due to filming commitments.[20] According to Martin Campbell, Henry Cavill was the only actor in serious contention for the role, but at 22 years old, was considered too young.[21] Sam Worthington was also considered.[22]In May 2005, Daniel Craig announced that MGM and producers Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli had assured him that he would get the role of Bond, and Matthew Vaughn told reporters that MGM offered him the opportunity to direct, but Eon Productions at that point had not approached either of them.[23] A year beforehand, Craig rejected the offer, as he felt the series had descended into formula: only when he read the script did he become interested. Craig read all of Fleming's novels to prepare for the part, and cited Mossad and British Secret Service agents who served as advisors on the set of Munich as inspiring because, "Bond has just come out of the service and he's a killer. [...] You can see it in their eyes, you know immediately: oh, hello, he's a killer. There's a look. These guys walk into a room and very subtly they check the perimeters for an exit. That's the sort of thing I wanted."[24]On 14 October 2005 Eon Productions, Sony Pictures Entertainment and MGM announced at a press conference in London that Craig would be the sixth actor to portray James Bond.[25] A tuxedo-clad Craig arrived via a Royal Navy speedboat.[26] Significant controversy followed the decision, with some critics and fans expressing doubt the producers had made the right choice. Throughout the entire production period, Internet campaigns such as danielcraigisnotbond.com expressed their dissatisfaction and threatened to boycott the film in protest.[27] Craig, unlike previous actors, was not considered by the protesters to fit the tall, dark, handsome and charismatic image of Bond to which viewers had been accustomed.[28] The Daily Mirror ran a front page news story critical of Craig, with the headline, The Name's Bland  James Bland.[29]The next important casting was that of the lead Bond girl, Vesper Lynd. Casting director Debbie McWilliams acknowledged that Hollywood actresses Angelina Jolie and Charlize Theron were "strongly considered" for the role and that Belgian actress Ccile de France had also auditioned, but her English accent "wasn't up to scratch."[30] Audrey Tautou was also considered, but not chosen because of her role in The Da Vinci Code that was released in May 2006.[31] It was announced on 16 February 2006 that Eva Green would play the part.[32]Principal photography for Casino Royale commenced on 3 January 2006 and concluded on 20 July 2006. The film was primarily shot at Barrandov Studios in Prague, with additional location shooting in the Bahamas, Italy and the United Kingdom. The shoot concluded at Pinewood Studios.[33]Initially, Michael G. Wilson confirmed that Casino Royale would either be filmed or take place in Prague and South Africa. However, Eon Productions encountered problems in securing film locations in South Africa.[34] After no other locations became available, the producers had to reconsider their options. In September 2005, Martin Campbell and director of photography Phil Meheux were scouting Paradise Island in the Bahamas as a possible location for the film.[35] On 6 October 2005, Martin Campbell confirmed that Casino Royale would film in the Bahamas and "maybe Italy". In addition to the extensive location filming, studio work including choreography and stunt coordination practice was performed at the Barrandov Studios in Prague and at Pinewood Studios where the film used several stages as well as the paddock tank and the historic 007 Stage. Further shooting in the UK was scheduled for Dunsfold Aerodrome in Surrey, the cricket pavilion at Eton College (although that particular scene was cut from the completed movie) and the Millbrook Vehicle Proving Ground in Bedfordshire.[28]After Prague, the production moved to the Bahamas. Several locations around New Providence were used for filming during February and March, particularly on Paradise Island. Footage set in Mbale, Uganda, was filmed at Black Park, a Country Park in Buckinghamshire, on 4 July 2006. Additional scenes took place at Albany House, an estate owned by golfers Ernie Els and Tiger Woods.[36] The crew returned to the Czech Republic in April, and continued there, filming in Prague, Plan and Loket, before completing in the town of Karlovy Vary in May. A famous Czech spa, Karlovy Vary, in German known as the Karlsbad,[37] was used as the exterior of the Casino Royale, with the Grandhotel Pupp serving as "Hotel Splendide".[38] The main Italian location was Venice, where the majority of the film's ending is set. Other scenes in the latter half of the film were shot in late May and early June at the Villa del Balbianello on the shores of Lake Como.[39] Further exterior shooting for the movie took place at properties such as the Villa la Gaeta, near the lakeside town of Menaggio.[28]A recreation of the Body Worlds exhibit provided a setting for one scene in the film. Among the Body Worlds plastinates featured in that scene were the Poker Playing Trio (which plays a key role in one scene) and Rearing Horse and Rider. The exhibition's developer and promoter, German anatomist Gunther von Hagens, also has a cameo appearance in the film,[40] although only his trademark hat is actually visible on screen.On 30 July 2006, a fire broke out at the 007 Stage. The damage was significant, but had no effect on the release of Casino Royale as the incident occurred one week after filming had been completed, and the sets were in the process of being dismantled.[41] On 11 August 2006, Pinewood Studios confirmed that no attempt would be made to salvage the remains of the stage;[42] instead it would be rebuilt from scratch.[43]In designing the credit sequence for the film, graphic designer Daniel Kleinman was inspired by the cover of the 1953 British first edition of Casino Royale, which featured Ian Fleming's original design of a playing card bordered by eight red hearts dripping with blood. Kleinman said, "The hearts not only represent cards but the tribulations of Bond's love story. So I took that as inspiration to use playing card graphics in different ways in the titles," like a club representing a puff of gun smoke, and slashed arteries spurting thousands of tiny hearts.[44] In creating the shadow images of the sequence, Kleinman digitised the footage of Craig and the film's stuntmen on the Inferno visual effects system, at Framestore CFC in London; the actors' silhouettes were incorporated into more than 20 digitally animated scenes depicting intricate and innovative card patterns. Kleinman decided not to use the female silhouettes commonly seen throughout the Bond title sequences, considering that the women did not fit with both the film's spirit and the storyline following Bond falling in love.[45]For the rest of the film, Special Effects and Miniature Effects Supervisor Chris Corbould returned to a more realistic style of film making and significantly reduced digital effects. According to Corbould, "CGI is a great tool and can be very useful, but I will fight to the tooth and nail to do something for real. Its the best way to go".[33] Three scenes involving primarily physical effects in the film were the chase at a building site in Madagascar, the Miami Airport chase sequence, and the sinking Venetian house, with sets located on the Grand Canal and in Pinewood Studios.[33]First on the schedule were the scenes on the Madagascar building site, shot in the Bahamas on the site of a derelict hotel which Michael G. Wilson had become acquainted with in 1977 during the filming of The Spy Who Loved Me.[33] In the scene, Bond drives a digger toward the building, slamming into the concrete plinth on which Mollaka is running. The stunt team built a model and put forward several ways in which the digger could conceivably take out the concrete, including taking out the pillar underneath. A section of the concrete wall was removed to fit the digger, and reinforced with steel.[33]The sequence at Miami International Airport was partly shot at the Dunsfold Aerodrome, in Surrey, which is known from British car show Top Gear, with some footage from the Prague and Miami airports.[33] In filming the scene in which the engine thrust of the moving aircraft blows the police car high into the air, second unit directors Ian Lowe, Terry Madden and Alex Witt used a crane with a strong lead cable attached to the rear bumper of the vehicle to move it up and backwards at the moment of full extension away from the plane.[33]The Skyfleet S570 aircraft in the film was an ex-British Airways 747-200B G-BDXJ which had its engines removed and was modified for its appearance in the film. The modified aircraft had the outboard engines replaced by external fuel tanks, while the inboard engines were replaced by a mock-up pair of engines on each inboard pylon. The cockpit profile was altered to make the 747 look like a prototype of an advanced airliner.[46] The plane used can be seen on the BBC motoring programme Top Gear on the Test Track.The sinking of the Venetian house at the climax of the film featured the largest rig ever built for a Bond film.[33] For the scene involving Bond following Vesper into the house undergoing renovation supported by inflatable balloons, a tank was constructed at the 007 stage at Pinewood, consisting of a Venetian piazza and the interior of the three-story dilapidated house. The rig, weighing some 90 tons, incorporated electronics with hydraulic valves which were closely controlled by computer because of the dynamic movement within the system on its two axes. The same computer system also controlled the exterior model which the effects team built to one-third scale to film the building eventually collapsing into the Venetian canal. The model elevator within the rig could be immersed in 19 feet (5.8m) of water, and used banks of compressors to strictly regulate movement.[33]At the time of filming, Aston Martin were still in the final phases of designing the DBS. The scene involving the car crash was devised using an Aston Martin DB9 that was especially modified to look like Bond's Aston Martin DBS V12 and reinforced to withstand the impact. Due to the low centre of gravity of the vehicle, an 18-inch (450mm) ramp had to be implemented on the road tarmac at Millbrook Proving Grounds and Adam Kirley, the stunt driver who performed the stunt, had to use an air cannon located behind the driver's seat to propel the car into a roll at the precise moment of impact. At a speed exceeding 70mph(113km/h), the car rotated seven times while being filmed, and was confirmed by the Guinness Book of Records on 5 November 2006 as a new world record.[33]The soundtrack of Casino Royale, released by Sony Classical on 14 November 2006, featured music composed by veteran composer David Arnold, his fourth soundtrack for the Bond film series, while Nicholas Dodd orchestrated and conducted the score. Producers Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli announced on 26 July 2006 that Chris Cornell, then-former lead singer of Soundgarden and former lead singer of Audioslave, composed and performed the title song, "You Know My Name".[47] The song's main notes are played throughout the film as a substitute for the James Bond theme, to represent Bond's youth and inexperience. The classic theme only plays during the end credits to signal the climax of his character arc.[48]Casino Royale premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square, the Odeon West End and the Empire simultaneously in London on 14 November 2006. It marked the 60th Royal Film Performance and benefited the Cinema & Television Benevolent Fund (CTBF), whose patron, Queen Elizabeth II, was in attendance with the Duke of Edinburgh. It is the third James Bond premiere that the Queen attended following You Only Live Twice and Die Another Day.[49] Along with the cast and crew, numerous celebrities and 5,000 paying guests were also in attendance with half the proceeds benefiting the CTBF.[50]Only two days following the premiere, pirated copies appeared for sale in London. "The rapid appearance of this film on the streets shows the sophistication and organisation behind film piracy in the UK," said Kieron Sharp, from the Federation Against Copyright Theft.[51] Pirated copies of the DVD were selling for less than 1.57. Craig himself was offered such a DVD while walking anonymously through the streets of Beijing wearing a hat and glasses in order to avoid being identified.[52]In January 2007, Casino Royale became the first Bond film ever to be shown in mainland Chinese cinemas. The Chinese version was edited before release, with the reference to the Cold War re-dubbed and new dialogue added during the poker scene explaining the process of Texas Hold'em, as the game is less familiar in China (this addition is reminiscent of dialogue that was added to the 1954 American TV adaptation in order to explain the rules of baccarat, the game featured in the original book). Casino Royale earned approximately $11.7million in China since its opening on 30 January on 468 screens,[53] including a record opening weekend collection for a non-Chinese film, with $1.5million.[54]After critics dubbed Die Another Day "Buy Another Day" because of around 20 product placement deals, Eon limited their promotions for Casino Royale. Partners included Ford Motors, Heineken Pilsener (which Eva Green starred in adverts for), Smirnoff, Omega SA, Virgin Atlantic Airways and Sony Ericsson.[55]The film has earned $599,045,960 worldwide. Casino Royale was the 4th highest-grossing film of 2006, and was the highest-grossing instalment of the James Bond series until Skyfall surpassed it in November 2012.[2]Upon its release in the United Kingdom, Casino Royale broke series records on both opening day1.7million[56]and opening weekend13,370,969.[57] At the end of its box office run, the film had grossed 55.4million, making it the most successful film of the year in the UK,[58] and as of 2011, the tenth highest-grossing film of all time in the country.[59]On its opening day Casino Royale was on top with $14,741,135, and throughout the weekend grossed a total of $40,833,156, placing it second in the ranking behind Happy Feet ($41.5million).[60] However, Casino Royale was playing in 370 fewer cinemas and had a better average ($11,890 per cinema, against $10,918 for Happy Feet).[61] It earned $167,445,960 by the end of its run in North America,[2] marking what was at the time the highest grossing film of the series, before being surpassed by Quantum of Solace's $168.4million.[62]On 18 November 2006, Casino Royale opened at the first position in 27 countries, with a weekend gross of $43,407,886 in the non-US / Canada / UK & Irish markets.[63] The film held the opening weekend record in India, taking in over $3,386,987, which was the highest for a foreign language film at the time.[64][65] The film retained the top spot at the worldwide box office for four weeks.[66]Casino Royale was simultaneously released on DVD, UMD and Blu-ray Disc on 16 March 2007.[67] In the UK, Casino Royale was released on 16 March 2007 on DVD and Blu-ray Disc.[68] The DVD and Blu-ray Disc releases broke sales records: the Region 1 Blu-ray Disc edition became the highest selling high-definition title to date, selling more than 100,000 copies since its release.[69] The region 2 DVD edition achieved the record of fastest selling title for its first-week release. The UK DVD has continued to sell well, with 1,622,852 copies sold since 19 March.[70] A copy of the Blu-ray Disc edition of Casino Royale was given out to the first 500,000 PAL PlayStation 3 owners who signed up to the PlayStation Network.[71] The DVD release includes the official music video for the film, and three documentaries detailing how Daniel Craig was chosen for the role of Bond, the filming, and an expanded version of the Bond Girls Are Forever documentary incorporating new interviews with Casino Royale cast members.A three-disc edition of Casino Royale on DVD was released in the United Kingdom on 31 October 2008, coinciding with the cinema release of the sequel, Quantum of Solace (the following week in the United States). As well as features present from the 2007 release, the collector's edition contains an audio commentary, deleted scenes, featurettes and a storyboard-to-film comparison.[72] A two-disc Blu-ray version also followed in late 2008, featuring additional supplementary materials, enhanced interactivity through BD-Live, and the previous version's 5.1 PCM soundtrack was replaced with a similar 5.1 Dolby TrueHD soundtrack.[73]Casino Royale was censored for its release in Britain, Germany and the United States. In Britain, the film received BBFC 12 rating after omitting some of LeChiffre's sadism and James Bond's reactions in the torture scene.[74] In the United States, two fight scenes were censored to achieve a PG-13 rating: the fight between Bond and the traitorous MI-6 Agent's contact Fisher, and the fight between Bond and Obanno in the stairway at the Casino Royale.[75] The German edit of the film cuts a sequence where the bomb-planter at the airport breaks a man's neck, instead replacing it with an alternate take.[75] The mainland Chinese cut of the film also trims the torture scene and the stairway fight, as well as a shot of Bond cleaning his wound at the hotel and a boat scene. The fully uncensored versions can be found on the Australian, Dutch, French, Hong Kong, Japanese, and Scandinavian Blu-rays and DVDs, and on more recent editions of the UK release (rated 15).Critics gave the film a positive response, in particular Craig's performance and credibility. During production this had been subject to debate by the media and the public, as Craig did not appear to fit Ian Fleming's original portrait of the character as tall, dark and suave. The Daily Telegraph compared the quality of Craig's characterisation of Bond to Sean Connery's and praised the script as smartly written, noting how the film departed from the series' conventions. The Times compared Craig's portrayal of the character to that of Timothy Dalton, and praised the action as "edgy",[76] with another reviewer citing in particular the action sequence involving the cranes in Madagascar.[77] Critics Paul Arendt of BBC Films,[78] Kim Newman of Empire[79] and Todd McCarthy of Variety[80] all described Craig as the first actor to truly embody Ian Fleming's James Bond from the original novel: ironic, brutal and cold.The film was similarly well received in North America. MSNBC gave the movie a perfect 5 star rating.[81] The film was described as taking James Bond "back to his roots", similar to From Russia with Love,[82] where the focus was on character and plot rather than the high-tech gadgets and visual effects that were strongly criticised in Die Another Day.[80] Rotten Tomatoes gave the movie an aggregate rating of 95%, the highest rating for a wide-release of the year. It is the fourth-highest rating for a Bond film on the site behind Goldfinger which received a 96%, From Russia with Love which received a 96%,[83][84] and Dr. No, with a 98% score.[85] Metacritic gave the movie a Metascore of 81, signifying "Universal Acclaim."[86] Entertainment Weekly named the film as the fifth best of the series,[87] and chose Vesper Lynd as the fourth best Bond girl in the series.[88] Some newspaper columnists and critics were impressed enough by Craig's performance to consider him a viable candidate for an Academy Award nomination.[89][90][91] Roger Ebert gave the film a four out of four star rating, the first for any of the James Bond films he reviewed. Ebert wrote that "Craig makes a superb Bond... who gives the sense of a hard man, wounded by life and his job, who nevertheless cares about people and right and wrong," and that the film "has the answers to all my complaints about the 45-year-old James Bond series," specifically "why nobody in a Bond movie ever seems to have any real emotions."[92] Time Out New York's Joshua Rothkopf called Craig "the best Bond in the franchise's history," citing the actor's "crisp, hateful, Mamet-worthy snarl... This is a screwed-up Bond, a rogue Bond, a bounder, a scrapper and, in the movies astoundingly bleak coda, an openhearted lover."[93]Vicky Allan of the Sunday Herald noted Bond himself, and not his love interests, was sexually objectified in this film. A moment where he rises from the sea is reminiscent of Ursula Andress in Dr. No; he feels "skewered" by Vesper Lynd's criticism of him; "and though it would be almost unthinkable now have a female character in a mainstream film stripped naked and threatened with genital mutilation, that is exactly what happens to Bond in [the film]." So although the film backed off from past criticism of Bond girls being sex objects, "the once invincible James Bond becomes just another joint at the meat market."[94] This sentiment is shared by the University of Leicester's James Chapman, author of License to Thrill, who also notes Craig's Bond is "not yet the polished article"; he felt his incarnation of Bond is close to Fleming's because he is "humourless," but is also different because "Fleming's Bond did not enjoy killing; Craig's Bond seems almost to relish it."[95]Andrew Sarris of The New York Observer wrote that this particular Bond film is "the very first that I would seriously consider placing on my own yearly 10-best list. Furthermore, I consider Daniel Craig to be the most effective and appealing of the six actors who have played 007, and that includes even Sean Connery."[96]Roger Moore wrote, "Daniel Craig impressed me so greatly in his debut outing, Casino Royale, by introducing a more gritty, unrefined edge to the character that I thought Sean might just have to move over. Craigs interpretation was like nothing wed seen on screen before; Jimmy Bond was earning his stripes and making mistakes. It was intriguing to see him being castigated by M, just like a naughty schoolboy would be by his headmaster. The script showed him as a vulnerable, troubled, and flawed character. Quite the opposite to my Bond! Craig was, and is, very much the Bond Ian Fleming had described in the books  a ruthless killing machine. It was a Bond that the public wanted." So impressed was Moore that he chose to buy the DVD.[97] Raymond Benson, the author of nine Bond novels, called Casino Royale "a perfect Bond film."[98]However, the film met with mixed reactions from other critics. Rob Gonsalves of eFilmCritic.com gave the film a positive review, but commented, "When you strip the 007 films down for action and 'realism,' you lose the soul of those old beloved Bond movies  they might as well be Jason Bourne movies."[99] John Beifuss of The Commercial Appeal said, "Who wants to see Bond learn a lesson about ego, as if he were Greg Brady in his 'Johnny Bravo' phase?"[100] Anthony Lane of The New Yorker criticised the more imperfect and self-aware depiction of the character, saying, "Even James Bond, in other words, wants to be 007."[101]Though American radio personality Michael Medved gave the film three stars out of four, describing it as "intriguing, audacious and very original... more believable and less cartoonish, than previous 007 extravaganzas," he commented that the "sometimes sluggish pacing will frustrate some Bond fanatics."[102] Similarly, a reviewer for The Sun praised the film for its darkness and Craig's performance, but felt that "like the novel, it suffers from a lack of sharpness in the plot" and believed that it required additional editing, particularly the finale.[103] Commentators such as Emanuel Levy concurred, feeling the ending was too long, and that the film's terrorist villains lacked depth, although he praised Craig and gave the film a B+ overall.[104] Other reviewers responded negatively, including Tim Adams of The Observer who felt the film came off uncomfortably in an attempt to make the series grittier.[105]The sequence with Craig sporting swimming trunks topped the sexiest male celebrity poll of The Sun,[106] and in 2009 Del Monte Foods launched an ice lolly moulded to resemble Craig emerging from the sea.[107] In 2008, Entertainment Weekly named it the 19th best film of the past 25 years.[108]The film appeared on many critics' top ten lists of the best films of 2006.[109]At the 2006 British Academy of Film and Television Arts Awards, Casino Royale won the Film Award for Best Sound (Chris Munro, Eddy Joseph, Mike Prestwood Smith, Martin Cantwell, Mark Taylor), and the Orange Rising Star Award, which was won by Eva Green.[110] The film was nominated for eight BAFTA awards, including the Alexander Korda Award for Best British Film of the Year; Best Screenplay (Neal Purvis, Robert Wade, Paul Haggis); the Anthony Asquith Award for Best Film Music (David Arnold); Best Cinematography (Phil Meheux); Best Editing (Stuart Baird); Best Production Design (Peter Lamont, Simon Wakefield); Best Achievement in Special Visual Effects (Steve Begg, Chris Corbould, John Paul Docherty, Ditch Doy); and Best Actor (Daniel Craig). This made Craig the first actor ever to receive a BAFTA nomination for a performance as James Bond.[111] He also received the Evening Standard British Film Award for Best Actor.[112]Casino Royale won the Excellence in Production Design Award from the Art Directors Guild,[113] and singer Chris Cornell's "You Know My Name" won the International Press Academy Satellite Award for Best Original Song.[114] The film was nominated for five Saturn Awards Best Action/Adventure/Thriller Film, Best Actor (Daniel Craig), Best Supporting Actress (Eva Green), Best Writing (Purvis, Wade and Haggis) and Best Music (David Arnold).[115] The 2006 Golden Tomato Awards named Casino Royale the Wide Release Film of the Year.[116] Casino Royale was also nominated for, and has won, many other international awards for its screenplay,[117] film editing,[118] visual effects,[119] and production design.[120] At the 2007 Saturn Awards, the film was declared to be the Best Action/Adventure/Thriller film of 2006.[121] Several members of the crew were also recipients of 2007 Taurus World Stunt Awards, including Gary Powell for Best Stunt Coordination and Ben Cooke, Kai Martin, Marvin Stewart-Campbell and Adam Kirley for Best High Work.[122]Michael G. WilsonBarbara BroccoliNeal Purvis
Robert WadePaul HaggisDaniel CraigEva GreenMads MikkelsenJudi Dench14 November 2006(2006-11-14) (London, premiere)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Casting
3.2 Filming
3.3 Effects
3.4 Music

3.1 Casting3.2 Filming3.3 Effects3.4 Music4 Release

4.1 Box office
4.2 Home media
4.3 Cuts and censorship

4.1 Box office4.2 Home media4.3 Cuts and censorship5 Reception

5.1 Reviews
5.2 Top ten lists
5.3 Accolades

5.1 Reviews5.2 Top ten lists5.3 Accolades6 See also7 References8 External links3.1 Casting3.2 Filming3.3 Effects3.4 Music4.1 Box office4.2 Home media4.3 Cuts and censorship5.1 Reviews5.2 Top ten lists5.3 AccoladesDaniel Craig as James Bond: A British SIS officer who, after being assigned 00-status, is sent on a mission to arrest a bomb-maker in Madagascar, where he stumbles upon Le Chiffre's terrorist cell and is then sent to defeat him in a high-stakes poker game at Casino Royale.Eva Green as Vesper Lynd: An agent for HM Treasury assigned to supervise Bond and finance his poker table exploits.Mads Mikkelsen as Le Chiffre: The main antagonist. A banker who services many of the world's terrorists. He is a mathematical genius and expert chess player and uses these skills when playing poker.Judi Dench as M: The head of MI6. Although she feels she has promoted Bond too soon and chides him for his rash actions, she acts as an important maternal figure in his life. Dench was the only cast member carried through from the Brosnan films.Jeffrey Wright as Felix Leiter: A CIA operative participating in the poker tournament while assisting Bond. This is the first Eon-produced Bond film in which Leiter is played by a black actor. (The only other black actor to portray Leiter was Bernie Casey in Never Say Never Again, which was not produced by Eon.)Giancarlo Giannini as Ren Mathis: Bond's contact in Montenegro.Simon Abkarian as Alex Dimitrios: Another contractor in the international terrorist underworld and associate of Le Chiffre, based in the Bahamas.Caterina Murino as Solange Dimitrios: Dimitrios' wife, whom Bond seduces. She is killed by Le Chiffre for unintentionally revealing one of his plans to Bond.Ivana Milievi as Valenka: Le Chiffre's girlfriend.Isaac de Bankol as Steven Obanno: A leader of the Lord's Resistance Army, introduced to Le Chiffre by Mr. White to account his finances.Jesper Christensen as Mr. White: A liaison for an unnamed criminal organisation.Sbastien Foucan as Mollaka: A bomb-maker pursued by Bond through a construction site in Madagascar.Tobias Menzies as Villiers: M's young secretary at MI6 Headquarters.Ludger Pistor as Mendel: A Swiss banker responsible for all monetary transactions during and after the poker tournament.Claudio Santamaria as Carlos: A terrorist employed by Le Chiffre to blow up an aircraft.Richard Sammel as Gettler: An assassin who works for an unnamed criminal organisation and contacts Vesper in Venice.Clemens Schick as Kratt: Le Chiffre's bodyguard, who often accompanies his boss wherever he travelsJoseph Millson as Carter: An MI6 agent who accompanies Bond in Madagascar.Ben Cooke as Williams: An MI6 agent who debriefs Bond in London.Darwin Shawh as Fisher: Dryden's underground contact. M sends Bond to kill him, his first official target. Bond tracks him down, nearly drowns him, and then shoots him dead.Diane Hartford as Card Player.1st  Owen Gleiberman, Entertainment Weekly3rd  Empire3rd  Marc Moha, The Oregonian3rd  Stephanie Zacharek, Salon.com3rd  William Arnold, Seattle Post-Intelligencer7th  Jack Mathews, New York Daily News8th  James Berardinelli, ReelViews8th  Desson Thomson, Washington Post8th  Michael Phillips, Chicago Tribune9th - Andrew Sarris, The New York Observer9th  Stephen Hunter, Washington Post10th  Michael Wilmington, Chicago Tribune10th  Mike Russell, The OregonianDifferences between James Bond novels and filmsOutline of James BondOfficial websiteCasino Royale at the Internet Movie DatabaseCasino Royale at AllRoviCasino Royale at Rotten TomatoesCasino Royale at Box Office MojoThe Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) is a union of wage workers which was formed in Chicago in 1905 by militant unionists and their supporters due to anger over the conservatism, philosophy, and craft-based structure of the American Federation of Labor (AFL). Throughout the early part of the Twentieth century the philosophy and tactics of the Industrial Workers of the World were frequently in direct conflict with those of the American Federation of Labor (forerunner of the AFL-CIO) concerning the best ways to organize workers, and how to best improve the society in which they toiled. The AFL had one guiding principlepure and simple trade unionism, often summarized with the slogan a fair day's pay for a fair day's work.[1] The IWW embraced two guiding principles, fighting like the AFL for better wages, hours, and conditions, but also promoting an eventual, permanent solution to the problems of strikes, injunctions, bull pens, and union scabbing.[2]The AFL and the IWW (whose members are referred to as Wobblies) had very different ideas about the ideal union structure. While the AFL primarily organized workers into their respective crafts, the IWW was created as an industrial union  placing all workers in a factory, mine, mill, or other place of business into the same industrial organization. The IWW also promotes the class-based concept of One Big Union.The IWW was formed by militant unionists, socialists, anarchists, and other labor radicals who believed that the great mass of workers are exploited by, and are in an economic struggle with, an employing class. The IWW employed a great diversity of tactics aimed at organizing all workers as a class, seeking greater economic justice on the job and, ultimately, the overthrow of the wage system which they believe is most responsible for keeping workers in subjugation. Such tactics are generally described as direct action, which is distinguished from other types of reform efforts such as electoral politics. IWW members believe that change accomplished via politics depends upon appeal to members of a ruling class who derive benefit from the subservient quiescence of the working class.While other unions (such as the CIO) adopted form and tactics  notably, industrial unionism and the sitdown strike  which were developed or pioneered by the IWW, labor laws passed by legislatures have sought to steadily erode the range and diversity of methods employed by all labor organizations. Confronted with such obstacles, militant IWW members tend to believe in a return to a union philosophy that was common a century ago, in which unjust labor laws are challenged directly by union actions, rather than accepted as a framework within which the union must operate.By 1912, after a number of defections and splits, the IWW numbered some twenty-five thousand, much smaller than many of its rival unions. But the IWW's influence was already outsized. The Congressional Commission on Industrial Relations noted in 1916 that "as a 'spirit and vocabulary' [the IWW] permeates to a large extent enormous masses of workers..."[3] Wobbly activists were those workers who not only reacted to economic forces, but who spent a considerable amount of time thinking, debating, and educating their co-workers about the impact of such forces upon society. John Reed observed, "Wherever, in the West, there is an IWW local, you will find an intellectual center... a place where men read philosophy, economics, the latest plays, novels; where art and poetry are discussed, and international politics."[4]The IWW printed hundreds of thousands of leaflets, promoted Industrial Education Clubs, and organized Propaganda Leagues.[5] Stickered slogans, referred to as "silent agitators", were printed by the million, and made available by the thousand. IWW libraries in union halls made available to any worker not only the organization's publications, but also practical topics about machinery and production, as well as classic works of scientists, theoreticians, and philosophers.[6] Knowledge and experience were likewise shared  new members were sometimes invited to chair meetings, not just to share the experience, but to initiate them into the community. Indeed, a favorite Wobbly answer to the question, who are your leaders, was the united response, we are all leaders.Wobblies believed not only that it took a working person to understand the needs of the workers, but in order to lead, that person must also be an educated worker.[5] IWW publications seemed to enjoy reporting on "the amazement shown by college professors who heard Wobbly speakers deliver talks upon a wide variety of subjects and reveal a remarkable understanding of complex economic and social questions."[5] By the time of the organization's founding in 1905, inquisitive workers already had a wide variety of union experiences and traditions to consider. In coming together as an organization, then, it is perhaps not surprising that the clash of ideas among IWW members resulted in passionate debate and an eventual winnowing of philosophies over several decades of evolution.Where did initial inspirations for the Wobbly philosophy come from? Historian Melvyn Dubofsky is worth quoting at length:Wobblies ... took their basic concepts from others: from Marx the concepts of labor value, commodity value, surplus value, and class struggle; from Darwin the idea of organic evolution and the struggle for survival as a paradigm for social evolution and the survival of the fittest class; from Bakunin and the anarchists the "propaganda of the deed"* and the idea of direct action; and from Sorel the notion of the "militant minority." Hence, IWW beliefs became a peculiar amalgam of Marxism and Darwinism, anarchism and syndicalism  all overlaid with a singularly American patina.[7]However, Dubofsky also identifies American traditions "dating back to the era of Jefferson and Jackson" from which the Wobblies derived inspiration, particularly the concepts of a society divided into "producers and nonproducers, productive classes and parasites".[7] Paul Brissenden likewise stated that, "[t]he main ideas of I.W.W.-ismcertainly of the I.W.W.-ism of the first few years after 1905were of American origin, not French, as is commonly supposed.[8]Wobblies sought to familiarize theoretical terminology for a worker audience of varied educative experience. A proletarian became a prole, and a plutocrat was a plute. Bill Haywood, in particular, had the ability to translate complex economic theories into simple ideas that resonated with working people. He would frequently preface his speeches with the statement, "Tonight I am going to speak on the class struggle and I am going to make it so plain that even a lawyer can understand it."[9] The Marxian concept of surplus value, Haywood conveyed simply as "unpaid labor."[10] He distilled the voluminous work of Karl Marx into a simple observation, "If one man has a dollar he didn't work for, some other man worked for a dollar he didn't get."[9]By the time of the 1905 founding of the Industrial Workers of the World, the question of whether unionized workers could secure significant change by political actions of their unions had been in contention for some decades. The question had split the National Labor Union in 1872.[13] It created divisions between the membership and the leadership of the Knights of Labor, with the leaders favoring various political agendas including Greenbackism, socialism, and land reform.[14] Labor historian Joseph Rayback believed that significant losses for organized labor in the 1890s pointed the way toward either socialism, or industrial unionism in order to maintain organized labor's momentum.[15]Yet Samuel Gompers, leader of the American Federation of Labor, opposed both courses of action. He and John Mitchell, head of the United Mine Workers, joined an alliance of conservative union leaders and liberal business men in forming the National Civic Federation (NCF).[16] That organization's critics on the left believed that its goals were to suppress sympathy strikes, and to replace traditional expressions of working class solidarity with binding national trade agreements and arbitration of disputes.[17]By 1905, the NLU was history, and the Knights of Labor mostly a memory. Mitchell and Gompers of the AFL were beginning to build an alliance with the Democratic Party.[18] While the focus upon political alliance by the AFL (at the perceived cost of class solidarity) was just one aspect of the differing union philosophies, it was a significant one. The formation of the Industrial Workers of the World was in many ways a direct response to the conservatism of the AFL, and its perceived failure to respond to the needs of western miners, lumbermen, and others. However, the political question would likewise play a central role in the internal disputes, and in the eventual evolution of the IWW itself.At its opening convention, the Industrial Workers of the World exhibited a "spirit of unity". Although nearly all of the delegates were committed to some form of Socialist politics, there were some significant philosophical differences just under the surface.[19] Western Federation of Miners members and other union veterans wanted the participation of the two Socialist parties, the Socialist Labor Party (SLP) and the Socialist Party, in spite of longstanding animosity between these two political organizations. However, the veteran labor activists did not wish to commit to any particular political party. Nonetheless, some of the Socialists in both camps assumed that an endorsement would be forthcoming.The IWW Constitution and Preamble resulting from the 1905 convention were essentially a compromise which papered over these, and other differences.[20] Furthermore, while the SLP viewed organized labor as a mere adjunct to Socialist Labor Party politics, the Socialist Party was divided over whether the AFL, or the new IWW should be the proper vehicle to carry the labor banner of socialism.[21] As a result, many Socialists actually opposed the IWW from the outset.The early IWW experienced numerous divisions and splits during the period from 1905 to approximately 1930. It also suffered repression by business and government entities during this period. These experiences had a profound effect on the philosophy and tactics of the organization that survived.In spite of the varied philosophies of the participants at the first IWW convention, there were a few compelling concerns which united all. Nearly all who attended acknowledged an "irrepressible conflict" between capital and labor.[22] Nearly all could be described as adherents of industrial unionism, as opposed to the craft unionism of the American Federation of Labor.[23] Acknowledging the common practice of AFL craft unions crossing each other's picket lines, the IWW adopted the WFM's description of the AFL as the "American Separation of Labor."[24] In addition to the limitations of organizing by craft, the IWW criticized the AFL for emphasizing common interests between labor and capital, and for organizing only elite workers rather than acknowledging the needs of the entire working class.[25]The AFL was bitterly attacked by speakers who organized the conference, such that many would have been pleased if the federation (although not necessarily its constituent unions) would simply cease to exist.[26] Samuel Gompers responded by declaring that the IWW's organizers were "trying to divert, pervert, and disrupt the labor movement of the country," describing them as "pirates" and "kangaroos."[26] Calling the AFL outdated was "inexcusably ignorant and maliciously false," said Gompers.[27] Referring to the birth of the IWW, Gompers commented that "[t]he mountain labored and brought forth a mouse, and a very silly little mouse at that... historians will record the Chicago [founding of the IWW] as the most vapid and ridiculous in the annals of those who presume to speak in the name of labor..."[28]Gompers warned all AFL affiliates not to cooperate with IWW members, and told AFL members not to support IWW strikes. Permission was granted to cross IWW picket lines. Although the AFL had offered some support to the Western Federation of Miners in the aftermath of the Colorado Labor Wars, that assistance was discontinued because of WFM affiliation with the IWW.[29] A number of AFL affiliates  machinists, carpenters, hat makers, leatherworkers, and others  decreed that any individual with an IWW card would not be allowed to work in their industries.[30]The IWW fought for workers' rights somewhat differently than did the AFL. Staughton Lynd described the IWW as "devoting itself to struggles around demands, rather than negotiating contracts."[31] Paul Buhle Lauds the idealism and creativity of the IWW, while asserting that "the AFL could not claim a single cultural contribution of note."[32] Melvyn Dubofsky described the AFL "[growing] fat while neglecting millions of laborers doomed to lives of misery and want", and the IWW offering to do what the AFL declined to do by giving hope to those neglected.[33] Yet Dubofsky believed he saw a contradiction between the IWW's goal of a better society, and the desires of its individual members for an improved life. As workers managed to improve their own lives, he theorized, they would have less interest in an improved society.[34] And, the IWW was up against "flexible and sophisticated adversaries..."[35] Those adversaries, as often as not, included the AFL.The IWW organized many who were "left out" of American society, including "timber beasts, hobo harvesters, itinerant construction workers, exploited eastern and southern European immigrants, racially excluded African Americans, Mexicans, and Asian Americans."[36] Due to feelings of alienation and impotence, these workers embraced radical theories aimed at disrupting and replacing the established social order.[37] The IWW maintained low initiation fees and dues, allowed universal transfer of union cards, and disdained apprenticeships in order to attract the lower strata of working society.[37]As a result of the splits and de facto purges, the IWW distilled a core set of beliefs and practices. It eschewed political entanglements for revolutionary industrial unionism. the Wobblies of the IWW sought to "comprehend the nature and dynamics of capitalist society and through increased knowledge, as well as revolutionary activism, to develop a better system for the organization and functioning of the American economy."[36]Labor Historian Melvyn Dubofsky has written that the IWW held "an instinctive distaste for the world as it was, as well as hope for the creation of a completely new world." Yet in addition to a belief in eventual revolution, the IWW "constantly sought opportunities to improve the immediate circumstances of its members."[38]Marxist Labor Historian Philip S. Foner identifies the same points in the manifesto which called the labor activists to the founding conference in 1905. On the back of each manifesto was printed a declaration of the two requirements for any labor organization to properly represent the workers:First -- It must combine the wage workers in such a way that it can most successfully fight the battles and protect the interests of the working people of to-day in their struggles for fewer hours, more wages and better conditions.Secondly -- It must offer a final solution of the labor problem -- an emancipation from strikes, injunctions and bull-pens.[39]IWW co-founders Father Thomas J. Hagerty and William Trautmann continued promoting these two essential goals in their 1911 pamphlet, One Big Union. The IWW needed to "combine the wage-workers in such a way that it can most successfully fight the battles and protect the interests of the workers of today in their struggles for fewer hours of toil, more wages and better conditions," and it also "must offer a final solution of the labor probleman emancipation from strikes, injunctions, bull-pens, and scabbing of one against the other."[40]Historian Daniel R. Fusfeld referred to the conflicting labor philosophies held by the AFL and its rivals as job-consciousness (the AFL), and class-consciousness (organizations such as the Knights of Labor and the IWW).[41] These philosophies resulted in oppositional alignment in regards to government.In Taking Care of Business, Paul Buhle wrote that the AFL-affiliated United Mine Workers President John Mitchell declared in 1903, "The trade union movement in this country can make progress only by identifying itself with the state." ... [Meanwhile, the] new National Civic Federation (which was supported by the AFL) ... sought to promote labor peace (on the terms of the employers, critics claimed) and to make class consciousness and class struggle obsolete.[42] While the AFL thus became more conservative, the IWW saw itself as a revolutionary organization dedicated to the "Abolition of the wage system."[43]While the AFL's Mitchell and Gompers nurtured their alliance with the Democrats,[18] the IWW changed its Constitution in 1908 to prohibit just such alliances. The 1908 Constitution states, "to the end of promoting industrial unity and of securing necessary discipline within the organization, the I. W. W. refuses all alliances, direct or indirect, with existing political parties or anti-political sects..."[43] This language is essentially unchanged in the 2011 IWW Constitution.[44]The prohibition on alliances with "anti-political sects" is noteworthy. According to Verity Burgmann and others, the Chicago IWW was "non-political" rather than "anti-political". And Joseph R. Conlin believes the deletion of a political clause from the Preamble in 1908 is only half the story; in 1911 the IWW rejected an amendment to the Preamble that referred to "the futility of political action".[45] In other words, the ban on political involvement only went so far (presumably, banning any political or anti-political alliances in the name of the union), and the balance of the IWW's membership saw nothing to be gained by outright hostility toward political action.Writing of the IWW's history through 1917, Foner (who, as a Marxist historian favored political action) noted that while most Wobblies disdained the ballot, several IWW leaders, individual members, and even entire locals did not necessarily reject politics, and some even participated in election campaigns. While offering skepticism about their accomplishing anything worthwhile, Solidarity nonetheless commented that there was room for such members in the industrial union movement, since individual members had a right to differing views.[46] Elaborating on this circumstance, Elizabeth Gurley Flynn wrote in the Industrial Worker,A working man may be an anarchist or a socialist, a Catholic or a Protestant, a republican or a democrat, but subscribing to the Preamble of the I.W.W. he is eligible for membership.[47]While the AFL identified with, and made accommodations for the benefit of government, the IWW was ardently opposed to what it viewed as capitalist wars. World War I saw "Charles Schwab of Bethlehem Steel heralding the day when labor would rule the world and Samuel Gompers edging rapidly toward the businessman's creed of maximum production..."[48] The IWW opposed the war effort.Big Bill Haywood described in his autobiography how the IWW issued stickers, which the IWW called silent agitators, to propagandize against the war. The stickers declared, "Don't be a soldier, be a man. Join the I.W.W. and fight on the job for yourself and your class."[49]The IWW's opposition to the war led to enmity and, reportedly, behind the scenes attacks from the AFL's Samuel Gompers. In 1919, the year after the end of the war, the AFL seemed to have second thoughts, concluding that works committees of the war years were "a snare and a cooptation plan."[50] Unfortunately by this time, many IWW leaders had been deported or were in prison for the IWW's anti-war pronouncements.Melvyn Dubofsky notes that Wobbly ideology and Socialist party doctrine both opposed capitalism and advocated something better, but beyond that, they "conflicted more than they agreed."[51] For nearly a decade, Bill Haywood tried to bridge the gap, acting as general secretary of the IWW, and as an officer of the Socialist Party. A fractious former hard rock miner, Haywood would tease audiences by telling them, "I'm a two gun man from the West, you know." After a moment to build the suspense, he would thrust hands into pockets, extracting a red IWW card with one hand, and a red Socialist card with the other.[52] Haywood considered both ideologies vital to the cause of changing the economic system, frequently describing Wobblyism as "socialism with its working clothes on." Yet Haywood was embraced only by the left wing of the Socialist Party, and was eventually ejected from the Socialist Party's National Executive Committee by the conservative wing.Generally speaking, American Socialists were interested in acceptance and gradual reform. Wobblies were more cynical about capitalism, and wanted a real revolution. Dubofsky believes, however, that IWW ideology was compatible with Syndicalism.[51]The New International Year Book for 1912 observed that,"the Industrial Workers of the World would place an industry in the hands of its workers, as would socialism; it would organize society without any government, as would anarchism; and it would bring about a social revolution by direct action of the workers, as would syndicalism. Nevertheless, it claims to be distinct from all three."[53]While noting general conformance in the language of IWW and Socialist doctrines, Helen Marot clarified in 1914,"It is the interpretation of the [IWW] preamble by individual members of the organization which has attached the Industrial Workers of the World to the Syndicalist rather than to the Socialist movement. The declaration in the manifesto that the workers should own and operate their own tools, and that they alone should enjoy the fruits of their labor, would mean, according to American Socialists, that all workers, through a political state, or regulated by it, would operate, own, and enjoy collectively all tools and the product of industry. [...] But [the Preamble], interpreted by the leaders of the Industrial Workers, is directly opposed to the political Socialism of America. It is the declaration of the Syndicalists that the new social order will not be dependent on political action or a political state, but it will be an industrial commonwealth in which all governmental functions as we know them to-day will have ceased to exist, and in which each industry will be controlled by the workers in it without external interference."[54]Marot further notes that such classifications (Socialist or Syndicalist) are important to theorists, but not so important to organized labor itself.Labor historian Philip S. Foner observed in 1997 that "virtually every scholar" who has studied the IWW considers it to be a type of syndicalist organization. Yet he likewise notes key differences.[55] For example, while European syndicalists operate within mainstream unions, the IWW has always displayed an antagonism toward, and disdain for existing craft based trade unions in the United States. This has led the IWW to embrace the concept of dual unionism. When William Z. Foster offered the IWW an opportunity to begin a European syndicalist style program of "boring from within" the AFL, the IWW rejected it. Foner concludes, therefore, that the IWW did not inherit its philosophy of revolutionary industrial unionism from French Syndicalism. However, he does also note similarities.[55] Foner believes that IWW members did learn about the organization's kinship with European syndicalist organizations through Wobbly publications, and thereby largely accepted the doctrines of syndicalism, especially after Bill Haywood brought back some ideas about syndicalist tactics from his 1910 visit to Europe.Conlin suggested in 1969 that those who wish to understand the true nature of the IWW should discontinue referring to the IWW as syndicalist. He makes several points: the IWW did not like the term syndicalism; the revolutionary industrial unionism of the IWW had "distinctly different origins" than did the syndicalism of Europe; and, there were key differences between the philosophy of the Wobblies, and that of the syndicalists.[56]Ralph Chaplin, IWW editor of Solidarity and later, of the Industrial Worker, appears to have made similar points to those made by Joseph Conlin. Chaplin wrote,In spite of certain misleading surface similarities, which are unduly stressed by shallow observers, the European anarcho-syndicalist movement and the I.W.W. differ considerably in more than one particular. This was made inevitable by reason of the fact that the I.W.W. was the result of a later and more mature period of industrial development.This accounts for the fact that European Syndicalism, unlike the I.W.W., is not organized into One Big Union on the basis of perfectly co-ordinated, centralized industrial departments. It also accounts for the fact that the form of the I.W.W. is designed to serve not only as a powerful combative force in the everyday class struggle, but also as the structure of the new society both as regards production and administration.[57]In 1981 Conlin gave up the "non-syndicalist" cause as a semantic exercise, while simultaneously complimenting Dubofsky for his superior treatment of the IWW's American roots.[56]Others note that the IWW draws upon socialist and anarchist traditions. In 1921, Robert Hoxie, author of Trade Unionism in the United States, referred to the IWW as quasi anarchistic.[58] Just two years earlier, in 1919, Paul Frederick Brissenden described the revolutionary industrial unionism of the IWW as industrial unionism "animated and guided by the revolutionary (socialist or anarchist) spirit..."[59]Brissenden wrote, "The anarchistic element was weak in 1905..."[60] Vincent St. John recalled in 1914, "there were so few anarchists in the first convention that there was very little need to classify them."[22] But Brissenden also observed that from its inception in 1905, the IWW "began a sharp swing ... from socialist industrial unionism to anarcho-syndicalist industrial unionism."[61] A significant milestone in this swing, in which the "anarchistic leanings of the direct-actionist wing of the organization"[60] came to the fore, occurred when the influence of the Socialist Labor Party was purged in 1908.Wobblies have been called socialist, anarchist, and syndicalist. Some would argue that none of these fit well. Writing of French syndicalism in The revolutionary internationals, 1864-1943, Milorad M. Drachkovitch offered the perception that,It did not occur to the syndicalists that the capitalist state, "eliminated" by the "expropriatory general strike", would be replaced by a new state with a new ruling classthe self-taught officials of the labor unions. It was only after the Bolshevik Revolution that most French syndicalists, dropping the last vestiges of anarchist anti-statism, adopted the slogan au syndicat le pouvoir, i.e., all power to the labor union, which of course meant all power to the union leaders. Syndicalism, without the anarchist prefix, thus eventually became one of the heretical variants of Leninism.[62]The IWW had explicitly rejected Leninism by 1921.[63] (Of course  perhaps unlike the French Syndicalists  the Wobbly perception of any perceived "centralizing" tactics by IWW leaders split the organization on multiple occasions...)For those who feel compelled to "classify" the modern IWW's revolutionary industrial unionism in some broader category, the term used by Brissenden  anarcho-syndicalism  seems to be the current category of choice. However, even Brissenden's use of the term anarcho-syndicalism (in 1919) was met with dismay in some IWW circles, with a writer in One Big Union Monthly calling such terms "very misleading."[11]A distinction should likewise be drawn between adopting tactics or principles from the anarchists, and actually being described as an anarchist organization. The IWW,...made a special effort to distinguish itself from the anarchists, emphasizing repeatedly that the two had "entirely different organizations and concepts of solving the social problem."[11]In 1912, William E. Bohn could write in The Survey that "all those who properly call themselves industrial unionists ... refuse to bind themselves by means of contracts with their employers. Believing, as they do, that there is an inevitable and continuous struggle between employers and employed, it seems to them that a contract is a truce with their natural enemy, a truce, moreover, which gives him all the advantage."[1] Within two decades, based upon experience with other unions whose philosophies did not preclude undercutting embattled groups of industrial workers for the sake of securing their own contract, this would no longer be the case. The CIO began organizing with a moderated form of industrial unionism (Conlin describes the CIO as composed of "nonrevolutionary" industrial unions).[64] And by 1938, having observed the burgeoning success of the CIO, even some branches of the IWW began to sign contracts with employers.The IWW had believed that if workers did not retain the right to strike whenever called upon, then employers could whipsaw one group of workers against another. Moreover, timed contracts allowed employers to prepare for strikes, rendering such job actions less effective.[65] The IWW's early attitude about labor contracts had mirrored that of the Western Federation of Miners: "The WFM never demanded a closed shop or an exclusive employment contract. It supported no apprenticeship rules, having no intention of restricting union membership. It wanted jobs for all, not merely for the organized few."[66] WFM Secretary Treasurer Bill Haywood believed that in time of crisis the AFL "had always proved impotent to aid its affiliates, usually sacrificing them on the 'sacred altar of contract'."[67] This view was shared by WFM President Charles Moyer, who told the 1903 WFM Convention, "It behooves us at all times to be free to take advantage of any opportunity to better our condition. Nothing affords the majority of corporations more satisfaction than to realize that they have placed you in a position where you are powerless to act for a period of years."[68] According to Historian Melvyn Dubofsky, neither the WFM nor its successive offspring  the American Labor Union (ALU) and the IWW  accepted that a contract with employers was legally or morally binding, and all three organizations believed that workers could best see to their interests by retaining the ability to strike when necessary.[68]However, employers used the no contract manifesto as an excuse not to meet with workers. Local media supported the employers, asking, what was the use of discussing grievances with members of an organization that refused a written agreement, if the workers were free to strike again the moment a dispute was settled?[69] This became a familiar circumstance, and as a result, other unions were sometimes able to sign members that had once marched under the banner of the IWW.From the Paterson strike until the rise of the Agricultural Workers Organization (AWO) in 1915, the IWW had organized successfully during labor struggles, but then had failed to hold its membership. As James P. Cannon would later write,...the IWW attracted a remarkable selection of young revolutionary militants to its banner. As a union, the organization led many strikes which swelled the membership momentarily. But after the strikes were over, whether won or lost, stable union organization was not maintained. After every strike, the membership settled down again to the die-hard cadre united on principle.[70]This circumstance prompted a discussion in the IWW press of the question, "What's wrong with the IWW?"[71]The job delegate system of the AWO proved successful and, for a time, allowed the IWW to ignore the problem of failing to retain members. Rather than soap boxing to sign up workers between jobs, carefully chosen union members with card kits were sent into the fields to sign up others on the job. The results were a considerable improvement.[72] Between 1915 and 1917, the IWW's Agricultural Workers Organization (AWO) organized more than a hundred thousand migratory farm workers throughout the midwest and western United States.[73] IWW members were routinely blacklisted from farm worker employment offices, prompting the IWW to advise job delegates to tear up their personal IWW cards in front of the boss to hold onto their own job. The AWO office would later provide a duplicate card.[74] But signing up significant numbers of workers only eased, and did not in any way solve the problem of membership losses resulting from the no contract philosophy.The question of contract became an important factor that tended to divide members of the IWW from their leaders.[65] The two principles of fighting for better wages, hours and conditions, and preparing for the ultimate triumph of labor often came into conflict. IWW members frequently chose the former, while their leadership often saw the latter principle as predominant.[65] As Philip Foner put it, activities that were logical and necessary on the trade union front frequently had to be rejected because they conflicted with revolutionary aims.[75]In Oil, Wheat & Wobblies, a book about the Industrial Workers of the World in Oklahoma, Nigel Anthony Sellars wrote that although the CIO "inherited the egalitarian traditions and syndicalist ideals" of the IWW, the CIO succeeded where the IWW had failed (in mass organizing of industrial unions) "in part because the newer organization did not repeat the Wobblies' mistakes, such as refusing to sign time contracts and rejecting political action."[76] The IWW view of political action has not been much affected by such analysis. However, in the period of the CIO's impressive ascent, the IWW philosophy about contracts was beginning to evolve. In military terms, the contract eventually came to be viewed somewhat as the role of the infantry, in that ground captured must in some fashion become ground held.There are two aspects of the contract question: official recognition of the union by the employer, and the labor contract itself. During its early years, the IWW rejected both.[77] Foner observed that the larger, stronger IWW locals were able to live with this circumstance, for they achieved recognition by force of numbers. However, weak IWW unions lost job control because hostile employers were not bound by contractual recognition, and the companies therefore resorted to hiring workers who were not IWW members.[75] Conlin observed, "[t]he issues of time contracts and union recognition proved to be the Wobblies' Achilles' heel every time they organized a successful strike."[78] Foner concludes that, "ironically, while the refusal to sign contracts was justified, in part, as a means of keeping the capitalists off balance, experience proved that it had the opposite effect of enabling the employers to use it to their own advantage."[75]One example of membership loss and acquisition relating to the contract occurred in the Baltimore garment industry. By September 1913 the IWW had organized some of the largest garment shops in the city. During a fourteen week strike, the IWW was undercut when the conservative AFL-affiliated United Garment Workers (UGW) brought in scab replacement workers. Shortly afterward, at their 1914 Nashville convention, a group of disenchanted UGW unionists split off to form the Amalgamated Clothing Workers (ACW). The IWW was initially the largest of these three organizations in Baltimore. Yet in the three-way free-for-all that occurred there in 1916  a struggle characterized by union scabbing and threats  the IWW lost all of its membership in the district as a result of the other two unions bidding against each other for collective bargaining agreements.[79]Meanwhile, IWW local unions that did sign contracts had their charters pulled. That was the fate of an IWW branch in Great Falls, Montana, in 1912.[80] Other local organizations were forced to disaffiliate from the IWW, as did the Metal and Machinery Workers Industrial Union No. 440 in Cleveland, Ohio during the 1930s, when they elected to sign a contract with an employer.[81]During the 1927 coal strike in Colorado, a challenge to the policy of refusing union recognition came from within the IWW, when IWW organizer Tom Conners replaced A.S. Embree, who had been jailed for violating the state's anti-picketing policy. After a very successful strike that depleted the state's coal reserves, Conners foresaw the possibility of the State Industrial Commission recognizing the IWW. Conlin indicates that this was the first time such a challenge to the IWW's policy of "no contracts, no recognition" had been made from within. However, Embree and his followers opposed the move, and nothing came of it. While the miners gained from the strike, the IWW failed to do so.[82]In 1938, the IWW Constitution was amended to allow industrial unions to adopt their own rules concerning contractual agreements.[83] A stipulation adopted in 1946 required that no such agreement could allow workers to engage in work that would undermine any strike.[83]Staughton Lynd, a labor attorney, activist, and author of Solidarity Unionism, has observed,[T]he critical question is not whether or not to have a contract. The critical question is what is in the contract. Ninety-nine percent of AFL-CIO contracts contain a no-strike clause, whereby labor gives up its self-activity, and a management prerogative clause, whereby management retains its ability to act unilaterally, for instance in closing plants. No contract is better than such a contract.[84]Contracts enforce "labor peace" through a clause that prohibits strikes for the duration of the contract. Some unions agree to a no-strike clause in exchange for a grievance arbitration provision, or some similar concession.[85] Not all labor contracts have no-strike clauses. On some occasions, no-strike clauses have become a contract issue in dispute, with workers refusing to accept the no-strike clause, and employers refusing to agree to a contract without same.In 2005, Staughton Lynd discussed the historical and legal circumstances relating to the no-strike clause at the IWW's centenary in Chicago, Illinois:When John L. Lewis, Philip Murray, and other men of power in the new CIO negotiated the first contracts for auto workers and steelworkers, these contracts, even if only a few pages long, typically contained a no-strike clause. All workers in a given workplace were now prohibited from striking as particular crafts had been before. This remains the situation today.Nothing in labor law required a no-strike clause. Indeed, the drafters of the original National Labor Relations Act (or Wagner Act) went out of their way to ensure that the law would not be used to curtail the right to strike. Not only does federal labor law affirm the right "to engage in . . . concerted activities for the purpose of . . . mutual aid or protection"; even as amended by the TaftHartley Act of 1947, Section 502 of what is now called the Labor Management Relations Act declares:Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require an individual employee to render labor or service without his consent, nor shall anything in this Act be construed to make the quitting of his labor by an individual employee an illegal act; nor shall any court issue any process to compel the performance by an individual employee of such labor or service, without his consent; nor shall the quitting of work by an employee or employees in good faith because of abnormally dangerous conditions for work at the place of employment of such employee or employees be deemed a strike under this chapter[;]and for good measure, the drafters added in Section 13 of the NLRA, now section 163 of the LMRA: "Nothing in this Act, except as specifically provided for herein, shall be construed so as either to interfere with or impede or diminish in any way the right to strike . . . ."[86]While the NLRA protects the right to strike, some strikes do not have legal protection. For example, "[i]f a collective bargaining agreement contains a no-strike clause (the union agrees not to go on strike while the contract is in effect), a strike during the life of the contract would not be protected. The strikers could be fired."[85] Some no-strike clauses, however, have qualifications which protect the workers, for example, if they refuse to perform assigned work that has been struck by other workers.The Industrial Workers of the World inherited the concept of economic action (as opposed to political action), in part, from the American Labor Union. Melvyn Dubofsky associates economic action with what the IWW would later call direct action.[67] The IWW first mentioned the term "direct action" in a Wobbly publication in reference to a Chicago strike conducted in 1910.[87] In this instance the specific methods of direct action are not recorded, but the account referred to a successful strike against Hansel & Elcock Construction which was followed by former strikers persuading former strike breakers to "dismiss themselves" from the job.[87]Direct action in the labor movement initially referred to the actions taken by workers for themselves, as opposed to actions taken in their name by legislative or other representatives.[88] For example, dual-card IWW members have been known to advocate direct action on the shop floor to force employers to provide safer working conditions, to be more responsive to workers' demands, and to avoid speedup situations.[89] However, the expression has sometimes "been contorted to cover all the implications of mayhem and destruction..."[88] Some of the confusion may result from varying definitions offered by different Wobbly publications. The Industrial Worker described direct action as "any effort made directly for the purpose of getting more of the goods from the boss." The eastern U.S. IWW publication Solidarity defined direct action as "dealing directly with the boss through your labor union. The strike in its different forms, is the best known example of 'direct action'."[90]Although lauded by civil libertarians as an important part of the struggles for civil and constitutional rights, the IWW's free speech fights were carried out for more concrete goals. If they weren't allowed to talk to workers, they wouldn't be able to organize workers.[91] Wobbly activists simultaneously demonstrated that direct action works, and that it was possible for members of the lower strata of society to challenge authority and, through determination and perseverance, to frequently win.[91]The workers and the IWW had a common enemy in the communities that became free speech battlegrounds. These were the job sharks, agencies that controlled employment in agriculture and the timber industry.[92] The combination of sharks, anti-union employers, and hostile or indifferent communities kept wages low, and employment uncertain for many workers.The attitude in some communities toward IWW members engaging in the fight for free speech is nicely characterized by an editorial in the San Diego Tribune on March 4, 1912:Hanging is none too good for them and they would be much better dead, for they are absolutely useless in the human economy. They are the waste material of creation and they should be drained off into the sewer of oblivion, there to rot in cold obstruction like any other excrement.[93]The strategy of the IWW during free speech fights was to put out a call for "footloose" workers to come to the community, and to challenge a no speaking ordinance simply by violating it. Wobblies would talk about the job, the unfairness of the system, or would simply read the Declaration of Independence, or the Bill of Rights to the U.S. Constitution. In violation of the law, they would get arrested. By filling the jails with workers, the IWW was able to put pressure on the community's taxpayers, who ultimately had to pay the bill for feeding and housing the prisoners. The taxpayers presumably had the power to avoid such expenses by forcing the local administration to change its policies, or to overturn the ordinance itself.A primary goal of union is to improve the wages, hours, and working conditions of working people, and the strike, or threat of a strike is one mechanism by which that can be accomplished. However, the IWW also believe that the strike is a means by which working people can educate themselves to the issues of class struggle. Such education, according to the Wobblies, is necessary training in the effort to properly exercise the general strike, which (according to IWW theory) is the best means by which to establish an industrial democracy.[94][95]The IWW has engaged in a significant number of celebrated strikes throughout its colorful history. Each is rich in its own way. During the Colorado coal strike of 1927, IWW organizers had the opportunity to apply many of the strategies and tactics they'd adopted during the previous decades.[96]Joseph Conlin has written that the 1927 coal strike was a "unique, indeed critical event in the social and economic history of the West." First, it was a coal strike run by Wobblies, rather than the United Mine Workers. Second, many of the miners had a company union, yet still elected to strike under the IWW. Third, it had the first positive result for Colorado coal miners in sixty years of struggle.[97][98]The IWW had editorially criticized the leadership of the United Mine Workers (UMW) during the 1913-14 strike which had led to the Ludlow Massacre. Their view: the miners had been "sold out" by "politicians" who had timidly refused to employ the full power of an aroused working class.[99] The United Mine Workers responded by banning IWW card holders from membership in the UMW.[99] Because the United Mine Workers had essentially left Colorado in defeat a decade earlier, the IWW began organizing Colorado coal miners in 1925. Organizer Frank Jurich was joined by A.S. Embree, a popular and very capable IWW organizer.[100] Embree had just come from prison, having been incarcerated on syndicalist charges. While in prison, Embree indicated his dedication to the cause. He had written, "The end in view [the revolution] is well worth striving for, but in the struggle itself lies the happiness of the fighter."[96] Embree initially began organizing outlying camps to avoid company opposition.[101]In 1927 the IWW called for a three day nationwide walkout to protest the execution of Sacco and Vanzetti.[102] While the United Mine Workers predicted the IWW's walkout would fail in Colorado, Sheriff Harry Capps of Huerfano County commented that "fully two-thirds of the miners in the [Walsenburg] district [are] members of the I.W.W."[103] When the walkout occurred, out of a total 1,167 miners, 1,132 stayed off the job, and only 35 went to work.[103] Under threat of injunction, the IWW leaders felt they'd demonstrated success, and they persuaded the miners to return to work one day early.[103] Conlin wrote, "The tactical decision of the Wobblies was to give ground on this occasion to intensify organizing efforts for a statewide strike."[96]Organizing proceeded apace. In one mine, the Supervisor went to work one morning and discovered "Wobbly stickers pasted on every timber and cross beam in the place: 'Join the Wobblies, Join the Wobblies.' " There were IWW posters "from the bottom of the shaft clear to the working face."[104]IWW leader Kristin Svanum met in a mass meeting with 187 delegates from 43 of the state's 125 mines to work out the miners' demands.[105][106] Industrial Solidarity declared, "These mass meetings [are] to be the legislative bodies of the strikers."[107] The rank and file miners were given full veto power over every aspect of the pending strike. The miners elected a General Strike Committee, which had the power to appoint all other committees,[107] with only miners eligible for committee membership  a policy that demonstrated "the democratic principles of the Wobblies".[96] While Wobbly organizers conducted the meetings, they had no vote in the miners' decisions.[107] The Wobblies were careful that the strike demands reflected only the immediate needs of the workers, rather than long range goals of the IWW.[96] IWW philosophy and economic analysis were communicated only passively through the printing of the union's Preamble on membership cards, on leaflets, and in personal conversations with organizers drawn from the rank and file.[108] For a long time, the Wobbly philosophy was based on the belief that organizing and developing solidarity constituted the best radical education for workers.[108] The perceptions expressed in the IWW Preamble coincided with the Colorado miners' personal experiences with capitalism, and also with their feelings about the United Mine Workers union which since 1914 had seemed to ignore their needs.[108]All national groupings were represented on the General Strike Committee  "Mexican, Slav, Spanish, Greek, Anglo, Italian, and Negro."[107]There were so many different nationalities in the coal towns of Colorado due to corporate recruitment policy. After the coal strike of 1903-04, the companies intentionally recruited replacement miners who would have social, cultural, and language barriers to overcome before they could unite with other miners to form unions.[109][110] But the IWW, always the champion of the immigrant and the ethnic worker, had readily overcome such challenges as early as the 1912 Lawrence Textile Strike.Docile immigrant workers may have been a boon to industry, but invariably, such workers were ruthlessly exploited. In the mines, yesterday's perplexed new arrival often became today's militant unionist.[111]Immigrants aroused by injustice became targets. The Colorado newspapers railed against foreign workers and, alternately, an alleged foreign, or a lower class philosophy. For example, IWW leaders were called "tramps with their pants pressed".[112] The Denver Morning Post criticized the strikers' spelling, their speech, their dress, their personal hygiene, and their values.[112] The IWW responded by promoting international and ethnic solidarity. Organizers with Spanish surnames played a vital role. The more loudly the coal operators objected, the quicker the Wobbly message circulated.[113]The IWW was careful to follow the minutiae of Colorado law related to the pending strike, in an effort to keep the focus on the miners, rather than on the IWW itself. Nonetheless, the State Industrial Commission declared the pending strike illegal. This decision angered even established labor organizations who had not supported the strike up to that point. They considered it an affront to all of organized labor in Colorado.[108]IWW organizers were arrested, beaten, and robbed.[114] Proclamations were passed by at least six city councils ordering the IWW to leave.[115] IWW union halls were wrecked. Strike preparations proceeded unabated, and strike votes were held throughout the state. In Lafayette, so many people arrived at the meeting hall to endorse the pending strike that the vote was moved to the football field, and conducted under the headlights of trucks. The Denver Post estimated that 4,000 attended.[114]Along with the coal companies, the state, and many local communities, the United Mine Workers came out publicly against the pending strike. But the strike was called in spite of the opposition, and miners walked. After two weeks of the Wobbly led strike, 113 Colorado coal mines had closed, and just 12 mines remained open.[116] Joseph Conlin declared it the most successful strike in Colorado's history.[108] The coal companies offered a non-negotiated pay increase of sixty-eight cents per day. This offer did not disrupt the strikers' motivation.[108]With IWW guidance, the General Strike Committee instructed the miners to commit no violence.[117] The strike saw auto caravans of five hundred strikers traveling in more than a hundred vehicles, touring struck communities to dispense donated food and other provisions. This not only spread the strike, it kept up the strikers' morale.[118] All participants were searched by their leaders for liquor or firearms before each activity.[119]Conlin quotes McClurg to observe that "Laws were broken, but selectively and with care."[120] The state of Colorado banned picketing, but miners voted in mass meetings to ignore the state's ban.[117] Colorado law outlawed red flags such as those long flown by the IWW, so the strikers carried American flags.[121] In a further declaration of non-violent intent, the IWW admonished strikers, "If anyone is going to be killed, let it be one of our men first."[117]The Columbine mine, one of the larger of the few mines still working, granted a fifty cent per day pay raise. The IWW saw this as one major coal company weakening, but announced that it was not enough.[118] The Wobblies organized massive marches to the Columbine, numbering from 500 to 1,200 miners plus their families. They sometimes brought a five piece brass band, and they sang union songs, satirizing the company and the police.[122]In one surprising episode of "philosophical warfare" during the strike, the IWW made an attempt to establish a workers' cooperative for striking miners at an abandoned mine. Two coal mine operators sought to demonstrate that such cooperatives were impossible, and they issued a challenge to the IWW to follow through at their facilities. However, they insisted that the IWW had to post a state-required safety bond within 24 hours, before it could reopen the mines. Since the IWW wasn't able to post the bond within the designated period, the experiment was not pursued.[123]Entire communities became organized during the 1927 strike, and they were capable of protracted militant action.[124] However, a strike typically puts a dramatic strain on relationships within communities. Affected relationships are not just between strikers and business interests, or between strikers and non-strikers. During a coal strike, entire families are involved.[125] One resident of a coal community spoke of the effect of the 1927 strike on students,You'd think the coal miner was the dirtiest reptile that walked the earth. Everybody was down on the coal miner when he went on strike ... And the teachers were against us. And they had their favorites. The scabs' boys were in there too and, of course, we had gangs just like they do today. And the teachers would side with the scabs' side. Why hells bells man, we had to do something! So we organized (Junior Wobblies) at school just to protect ourselves.[126]The State of Colorado and local law enforcement began to arrest every strike leader that they could identify, on vagrancy or other trumped up charges. Many were deported from the state. In Trinidad, in Walsenberg, and elsewhere, members of strikers' families stepped forward to take the place of arrested leaders, and lead the strike.[127]Seventy-five IWW members in the Trinidad jail conducted protests that featured bonfires. Prisoners in the Lafayette jail carried on incessant singing. When they were offered their freedom, they refused to leave. A group of prisoners in Erie persuaded their jailers that deputies in Utah and Wyoming received higher pay, had better working conditions, and worked shorter hours.[128] In Pueblo, the jail was secured by "200 deputies armed with tear bombs, machine guns, rifles, and fire engine pumpers."[129]Newspapers began calling for the governor to no longer withhold the "mailed fist", to strike hard and strike swiftly,[130] and for "Machine Guns Manned By Willing Shooters" at more of the state's coal mines.[131] Within days, state police and mine guards fired machine guns, rifles, and pistols against 500 unarmed miners and their wives at the Columbine mine, killing six.[132] Now faced with their own massacre, the IWW's leaders kept their focus on the immediate goal: winning the strike. After the memorial services, when some angry miners talked about getting their guns, organizers counseled them with the words of Joe Hill: "don't mourn, organize!"[133]The miners won a dollar a day increase from the 1927 strike.[134] The miners in the northern field won union recognition from the second largest coal operator in Colorado.[135] It was not recognition of the IWW, as it turned out. The company picked a union for the miners, and it was the United Mine Workers. Nonetheless, these were the most substantial gains the miners had ever achieved from a strike in Colorado.[134] It was the only increase obtained by coal miners in the country during the period from 1928 to 1930.[134]Although the United Mine Workers in Colorado had vocally opposed the strike, they had established an official position of neutrality. However, United Mine Workers agents conducted overt actions against the strikers, including participation in vigilante raids against IWW property.[120] Some UMW miners scabbed on the IWW strike,[136] and others became informants for the state police.[120] One popular United Mine Workers official, a union organizer from the Ludlow era by the name of Mike Livoda, hired himself out to the governor to spy on the Wobblies.[136]The most pervasive spying during the 1927 strike was most probably conducted by Colorado Fuel and Iron, the coal and steel company owned by the Rockefeller dynasty.[137] The company organized a network of spies to infiltrate, propagandize against, and disrupt the IWW. Archives currently held at the Bessemer Historical Society reveal that the company used its spies and its relationship with the authorities to compile dossiers on union activists, and to obtain photographs, IWW membership lists, private union correspondence, and other union materials related to the strike.Summing up the Colorado coal strike, Joseph Conlin concludes that Colorado coal miners were radical, based upon their experiences, and willfully chose to have the IWW lead them. In Conlin's words, "[t]he failure of the Wobblies to establish and maintain a viable organization in Colorado resulted from the anarcho-syndicalist strategy of the IWW (i.e., no labor contracts, no union recognition), not from the absence of class consciousness and radicalism among the miners."[138]Vincent St. John, theorist and leader of the Industrial Workers of the World, wrote in 1917,A long drawn out strike implies insufficient organization or that the strike has occurred at a time when the employer can best afford a shut downor both. Under all ordinary circumstances a strike that is not won in four to six weeks cannot be won by remaining out longer. In trustified industry the employer can better afford to fight one strike that lasts six months than he can six strikes that take place in that period.[139]Strikes are to be called "when the employers can least afford a cessation of workduring the busy season and when there are rush orders to be filled."[139] If a strike does not succeed, St. John advises, then the employees go back to work and continue to conduct a job action while on the job.[139] (See Strike on the job, below) St. John envisioned that strike breakers could be isolated by the union. "Interference by the government is resented by open violation of the government's orders, [and] going to jail en masse..."[139]When workers conduct a sit-down strike, they take possession of the workplace by "sitting down" at their work stations, preventing the employer from replacing them with strikebreakers, or moving production to other locations.Lucy Parsons, whose husband was executed in the aftermath of the Haymarket affair, advocated the sit-down strike in her speech at the IWW's Founding Convention. She commented, "My conception of the strike of the future is not to strike and go out and starve but to strike and remain in and take possession of the necessary property of production."[140] Just over a year later, the IWW initiated the first sit-down strike in American history on December 10, 1906, at the General Electric Works in Schenectady, New York, when 3,000 workers sat down on the job and stopped production to protest the dismissal of three union members.[141] The strikers were persuaded to use "syndicalistic tactics which [were] strongly advocated" in IWW literature. IWW sources reported that the AFL attacked the IWW in the local press over the strike. The AFL required its affiliates not to honor the strike, on pain of losing their charter.[142]The sit-down strike is similar to the sit-in protest, which was used in India during the struggle against British rule, following the experiences of Mohandas Gandhi in South Africa.[143]According to Philip Taft and Philip Ross, U.S. workers who participate in a sit-down strike lose their legal right to recall, based upon a decision by the U.S. Supreme Court.[12]Although the IWW pioneered the economic boycott, The New York Tribune suggested that the IWW was a German front, responsible for acts of sabotage throughout the nation.[144] The IWW did not use the boycott frequently in its early days, primarily because IWW members were frequently not consumers of the products which might be boycotted. However, the organization did believe that the boycott could be an effective weapon in some situations.[145]During the 1912 textile strike in Lawrence, Massachusetts, the IWW boycotted merchants on Essex Street who were opposed to the strikers. The boycott was successful.[145]In 1923, a boycott "of all California products in ship's stores" was threatened in an effort to have the Criminal Syndicalist Law repealed.[144] The threat, carried out in conjunction with a general strike on the Los Angeles and San Francisco waterfronts, was successful in shutting down the harbors.[144]According to a pamphlet produced by the Industrial Workers of the World,A general strike is a strike involving workers across multiple trades or industries that involves enough workers to cause serious economic disruption.In essence, a general strike is the complete and total shutdown of the economy. A general strike can last for a day, a week, or longer depending on the severity of the crisis, the resolve of the strikers, and the extent of public solidarity. During the strike, large numbers of workers in many industries (excluding employees of crucial services, such as emergency/medical) will stop working and no money or labor is exchanged. All decisions regarding the length of the strike, the groups of workers who continue working, and demands of the strikers are decided by a strike committee.[146]Bill Haywood believed that industrial unionism made possible the general strike, and the general strike made possible industrial democracy.[95] In a 1911 speech in New York City, Haywood explained his view of the economic situation, and why he believed a general strike was justified,The capitalists have wealth; they have money. They invest the money in machinery, in the resources of the earth. They operate a factory, a mine, a railroad, a mill. They will keep that factory running just as long as there are profits coming in. When anything happens to disturb the profits, what do the capitalists do? They go on strike, don't they? They withdraw their finances from that particular mill. They close it down because there are no profits to be made there. They don't care what becomes of the working class. But the working class, on the other hand, has always been taught to take care of the capitalist's interest in the property.[95]Haywood acknowledged three different levels of general strike:The ultimate goal of the general strike, according to the Industrial Workers of the World, is to displace capitalists and give control over the means of production to workers.[147] Foner notes that the first person recorded mentioning the general strike as a weapon for the IWW was Lucy Parsons.[94] The concept didn't receive much attention from the Wobbly press until 1910, and especially 1911.[94]According to Wobbly theory, the conventional strike is an important (but not the only) weapon for improving wages, hours, and working conditions for working people. These strikes are also good training to help workers educate themselves about the class struggle, and about what it will take to execute an eventual general strike for the purpose of achieving industrial democracy.[148] During the final general strike, workers would not walk out of their shops, factories, mines, and mills, but would rather occupy their workplaces and take them over.[148] Prior to taking action to initiate industrial democracy, workers would need to educate themselves with technical and managerial knowledge in order to operate industry.[148]According to Foner, the Wobbly conception of industrial democracy is intentionally not presented in detail by IWW theorists; in that sense, the details are left to the "future development of society".[149] However, certain concepts are implicit. Industrial democracy will be "a new society [built] within the shell of the old."[150] Members of the industrial union educate themselves to operate industry according to democratic principles, and without the current hierarchical ownership/management structure. Issues such as production and distribution would be managed by the workers themselves.[150]A "strike on the job" was often called when a conventional strike seemed likely to lose. When some Wobblies were fired for exercising a strike on the job, they would move to a different job, unafraid to repeat the tactic as needed.[151] See Silent strike, slowdown, exceptional obedience (work to rule), below.Several labor historians have used the expression "silent strike" to identify one strike tactic among many ascribed to the IWW.[152] However, it doesn't appear that the Industrial Workers of the World often used the expression "silent strike". One exception was a 1911 report from Frank Little to the Industrial Worker on his time working with California farmworkers. "We have the silent strike on... The slave drivers are wild  the slaves won't work as hard as they want them to."[153]A definition of silent strike is offered in a book about the Filipino sugar strike of 1924-1925:...employees who do not receive the wages demanded will go on a silent strike, staying on the job, but doing only enough work to earn the wages they receive.[154]According to the book, no IWW organizers were involved in a strike that erupted into a gunbattle, but the Honolulu Star-Bulletin blamed the IWW for the labor unrest anyway.[155]The Harvard Monthly of 1913 offers a more embellished definition,In case of failure to achieve any gains by a strike, the worker resorts to sabotage, the silent strike by which are gained all the advantages of the open strike without its dangers; i.e., the men keep their places at their machines, thus preventing and making unnecessary the employment of scabs, pretending to do the work for which they receive their pay, but actually doing only so much of it as is needed to deceive the overseers. At the same time the worker employs many methods of attacking the employer, such as breaking delicate parts of machinery, mixing wrong ingredients into compounds, telling truth or lies to customers, anything, in short, to force the employer to terms.It is useless to assert that these methods will not appeal to AngloSaxon workers, as does one writer on the subject. Certainly sabotage is not "fair-play," but neither is in the eyes of the laborer, the condition which forces him to it.[156]The terms "exceptional obedience" and "work to rule" appear to be modern variations of a similar expression frequently used by the Wobblies  "striking on the job". This tactic went by other names (and descriptions) as well. In her introduction of the 1916 pamphlet "Sabotage", Elizabeth Gurley Flynn observed that "sabotage [is] an instinctive defense [that] existed long before it was ever officially recognized by any labor organization. Sabotage means primarily: the withdrawal of efficiency."[157] (See Sabotage section, below.)Because the IWW gave vocal support to sabotage during the period after 1910 (usually accompanied by an advisory against violence)  frequently explained as anything from conscious withdrawal of efficiency to more definite measures  the definitions tend to be vague.[158] A common Wobbly expression such as "fix the job" might mean a slowdown, a work stoppage, or something more.Dubofsky writes that the "on the job strike [is] essentially a form of non-violent sabotage", and that,Sometimes, it was claimed, the workers could even effect sabotage through exceptional obedience: Williams and Haywood were fond of noting that Italian and French workers had on occasion tied up the national railroads simply by observing every operating rule in their work regulations.[159]The IWW withdrew the "official" status of Flynn's sabotage pamphlet, but it is still in circulation.[160] In 1919 the IWW likewise advised its membership that the broad IWW definition of sabotage, essentially covering a range of activities from slacking on the job to disabling equipment, had become so distorted toward the latter (in the IWW's view) that the use of the word had become more trouble than it was worth (see Sabotage section, below).[161]While the IWW pioneered many of these concepts, they have since been adopted and advocated by others. For example, in A Troublemaker's Handbook 2, Aaron Brenner has written,Workers have the power to inflict economic damage on a company without going on strike. They can use this power to extract concessions at the bargaining table by disrupting production, undermining management control on the shop floor, and hurting the companys profitswhile still on the job. Such inside strategies are not easy, but they can be better than walking out, especially when the company is prepared for a strike.[162]The Troublemaker's Handbook discusses some legal aspects of "inside strategies", including the fact that legality may depend, in part, upon the reasons offered for a work to rule campaign.[163] The modern IWW likewise offers disclaimers on its website when introducing historical documents related to sabotage, for example,[excerpt] The IWW takes no official position on sabotage (i.e. the IWW neither condones nor condemns such actions). Workers who engage in some ... forms of sabotage risk legal sanctions.[164]When disgruntled workers damage or destroy equipment or interfere with the smooth running of a workplace, it is called workplace sabotage. While Luddites sought to "turn back the clock" to an era before the introduction of workplace machinery, radical labor unions such as the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) have advocated sabotage as a tactical means of self-defense against unfair working conditions.The first references to the terms "sabotage" and "passive resistance" in the IWW press appeared in approximately 1910. These terms were used in connection with a strike against a Chicago clothing company called Lamm & Co.,[87] and the connotation of sabotage in that job action referred to "malingering or inefficient work."[165]The IWW was shaped in part by the industrial unionism philosophy of Big Bill Haywood, and in 1910 Haywood was exposed to sabotage while touring Europe:The experience that had the most lasting impact on Haywood was witnessing a general strike on the French railroads. Tired of waiting for parliament to act on their demands, railroad workers walked off their jobs all across the country. The French government responded by drafting the strikers into the army and then ordering them back to work. Undaunted, the workers carried their strike to the job. Suddenly, they could not seem to do anything right. Perishables sat for weeks, sidetracked and forgotten. Freight bound for Paris was misdirected to Lyon or Marseille instead. This tactic  the French called it "sabotage"  won the strikers their demands and impressed Bill Haywood.[166]For the IWW, sabotage came to mean any withdrawal of efficiency  including the slowdown, the strike, or creative bungling of job assignments.[167]Ralph Chaplin, an IWW artist and poet, drew the IWW's image of a black cat with flashing teeth and bared claws as a symbol of the IWW's concept of sabotage. In testimony before the court in a 1918 trial of IWW leaders, Chaplin stated that the black cat "was commonly used by the boys as representing the idea of sabotage. The idea being to frighten the employer by the mention of the name sabotage, or by putting a black cat somewhere around. You know if you saw a black cat go across your path you would think, if you were superstitious, you are going to have a little bad luck. The idea of sabotage is to use a little black cat on the boss."[168]Historically the IWW was accused of outright damage to property  for example, getting the blame for causing wheat field fires in a book of fiction by Zane Grey, published in 1919 at the height of the red scare.[169] The extent to which the IWW actually practiced sabotage, other than through their "withdrawal of efficiency," is open to dispute.[170] IWW organizers often counseled workers to avoid any actions that would hurt their own job prospects. Even so, when the term "sabotage" is applied to workers, it is frequently interpreted to mean actual destruction.[88] A study by Johns Hopkins University in 1939 determined,Although there are contradictory opinions as to whether the IWW practices sabotage or not, it is interesting to note that no case of an IWW saboteur caught practicing sabotage or convicted of its practice is available.[165]Melvyn Dubofsky has written, "...hard as they tried, state and federal authorities could never establish legal proof of IWW-instigated sabotage. Rudolph Katz ... was perhaps close to the truth when he informed federal investigators, 'The American Federation of Labor does not preach sabotage, but it practices sabotage; and the I.W.W. preaches sabotage, but does not practice it.'"[159]Conlin seems not to accept the implied Wobbly innocence on the charge of sabotage. Rather, he puts any possible transgressions into a different perspective, writing (in 1969) that in the aftermath of the anti-war crackdown,The I.W.W.'s actual culpability of wheatfield fires and sawmill wreckings had become unimportant because of the government's greater offenses.[171]In 1918, sedition and anti-sabotage laws were passed in the United States. The General Executive Board of the IWW issued a statement referring to the anti-sabotage law,[161] which concluded:The membership will find it to their advantage to forget and drop the word. The word itself is not worth it. It may arise again in the future in its true light and in its true meaning. If so, the future will care for itself. We should be and are too busy building the One Big Union to argue with Congress or departments of justice as to the real meaning of a poor French word.[161]Robert Hoxie, whose work was collected in the 1921 publication Trade Unionism in the United States, was one of the foremost experts on the trade union movement in the early twentieth century. Hoxie considered the Industrial Workers of the World the "most clear representative" of revolutionary unionism in the United States. In his discussion of the IWW, he explained the nature of sabotage in detail that is worth quoting at length:Sabotage is an elusive phenomena and is difficult of accurate definition. Briefly described it is called "striking on the job." J. A. Estey, in his "Revolutionary Unionism," does well when he says: "In Syndicalist practice it [sabotage] is a comprehensive term, covering every process by which the laborer, while remaining at work, tries to damage the interests of his employer, whether by simple malingering, or by bad quality of work, or by doing actual damage to tools and machinery" (p. 96). This definition puts admirably the essential, underlying characteristics of sabotage, but in practice it ranges even beyond such limits. There are almost an indefinite number of ways of "putting the boots to the employer" which have come to properly be included under the general designation, and some of them have been employed by conservative unionists time out of mind. Ca' Canny or soldiering is one of them, which was a practice long before revolutionary unionism was known to the mass of workers. In essence it is practiced by every union that sets a limitation on output. Living strictly up to impossible safety rules enacted by the employers for their own protection is another method. Wasting materials, turning out goods of inferior quality or damaging them in the process, misdirecting shipments, telling the truth about the quality of products, changing price cards, sanding the bearings, salting the soup and the sheets, "throwing the monkey wrench into the machinery"all are methods of practicing sabotage that have become familiar.[172]A study in 1969 concluded that "IWW activity was virtually free of violence."[12] However, it was not uncommon for violence to be called for, and used against IWW organizers and members. In 1917, for example, popular organizer Frank Little, an officer of the IWW's General Executive Board, was hung from a Butte, Montana railroad trestle, a victim of vigilante justice.[173] And during the 1927 coal strike in Colorado, the Denver Morning Post editorialized that if the Wobblies picketed again, then it was time for the governor to stop withholding the "mailed fist", and to strike hard and strike swiftly against them.[174] Two weeks later, the Boulder Daily Camera editorialized that "machine guns manned by willing shooters are wanted" at Colorado coal mines.[175] The following week, striking miners were machine gunned by the state, and six died. Conlin has asserted that "few organizations in American history of any stripe have experienced repression so cynical as did the I.W.W."[176]In a few cases, violence was met with violence. Who was at fault, and who initiated the attack, have been historical questions debated to the present day in both the Everett massacre and the Centralia massacre, although a study by Philip Taft and Philip Ross concludes that "the IWW in Everett and Centralia was the victim, and the violence was a response to attacks made upon its members for exercising their constitutional rights."[12]Thus, it is no surprise that the question of violence was a perennial matter of discussion and debate within the IWW. Some, like Arturo Giovannitti, Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, and Vincent St. John, took the position that while the union did not favor violence, it would not shy away from its use if necessary to accomplish the social revolution.[177] "Smiling Joe" Ettor, on the other hand, agreed with Bill Haywood that the only kind of force to which the organization could lend its name was the use of the general strike for the overthrow of capitalism.[177] Haywood, who had been secretary treasurer of the Western Federation of Miners during a violent period in its history, described the goals of the IWW in 1913:It will be revolution, but it will be bloodless revolution. The world is turning against war. People are sickened at the thought. Even labor wars of the old type are passing. I should never think of conducting a strike in the old way. There will never be another Coeur d'Alene, another Cripple Creek. I, for one, have turned my back on violence. It wins nothing.When we strike now, we strike with our hands in our pockets. We have a new kind of violencethe havoc we raise with money by laying down our tools. Our strength lies in the overwhelming power of numbers.[178]Conlin has also observed that "to dwell on the martyrs and the debacle that did in the I.W.W. (i.e., government repression after World War I) is to detract or at least to distract from the Wobblies' importance as a functioning and ... apparently successful union."[179]In 1969 the History of Violence in America reported about the 1918 trial of IWW officers and members,Unlike the other national federations such as the Knights of Labor, the American Federation of Labor, and the Congress of Industrial Organizations, the IWW advocated direct action and sabotage. These doctrines were never clearly defined, but did not include violence against isolated individuals. Pamphlets on sabotage by Andre Tridon, Walker C. Smith, and Elizabeth Gurley Flynn were published, but Haywood and the lawyers for the defense at the Federal trial for espionage in Chicago in 1918 denied that sabotage meant destruction of property. Instead Haywood claimed it meant slowing down on the job when the employer refused to make concessions.[12]Foner observes that the IWW's General Executive Board issued a statement opposing violence:[The IWW] does not now and never has believed in or advocated either destruction or violence as a means of accomplishing industrial reform; first, because no principle was ever settled by such methods; second, because industrial history has taught us that when strikers resort to violence and unlawful methods, all the resources of Government are immediately arrayed against them and they lose their cause; third, because such methods destroy the constructive impulse which it is the purpose of this organization to foster and develop in order that the workers may fit themselves to assume their places in the new society.[177]Robert Hoxie writes,In the popular conception of things revolutionary unionism is generally distinguished by violence and sabotage. The tendency, however, to make violence the hall-mark of revolutionary unionists is a great mistake. The bulk of revolutionary unionists embraces the most peaceful citizens we have, and on principle. Most violence in labor troubles is committed by conservative unionists or by the unorganized.[180]Hoxie continues,In short, violence in labor troubles is a unique characteristic of no kind of unionism, but is a general and apparently inevitable incident of the rise of the working class to consciousness and power in capitalistic society.[181]Secondly, revolutionary unionism is not to be marked off from other kinds of unionism by its employment of sabotage as an offensive and defensive weapon. It is true that sabotage is a weapon whose use is highly characteristic of revolutionary unionism, but the notion that its use is confined to revolutionary unionists fades out the moment its true character and varied forms are known. It is moreover distinctly repudiated by many revolutionary unionists, is not confined to revolutionary unions, and, it might be added, is not confined to workers alone.[172]Hoxie explains,As the unionists point out, essentially the same thing is practiced by employers and dealers who adulterate goods, make shoddy, conceal defects of products, and sell goods for what they are not.[172]In 1916, the Commission on Industrial Relations, created by the U.S. Congress, reported,The greatest uncertainty exists regarding the legal status of almost every act which may be done in connection with an industrial dispute. In fact, it may be said that it depends almost entirely upon the personal opinion and social ideas of the court in whose jurisdiction the acts may occur.The general effect of the decisions of American courts, however, has been to restrict the activities of labor organizations and deprive them of their most effective weapons, namely, the boycott and the power of picketing, while on the other hand the weapons of employers, namely, the power of arbitrary discharge, of blacklisting, and of bringing in strikebreakers, have been maintained and legislative attempts to restrict the employers' powers have generally been declared unconstitutional by the courts. Furthermore, an additional weapon has been placed in the hands of the employers by many courts in the form of sweeping injunctions, which render punishable acts which would otherwise be legal, and also result in effect in depriving the workers of the right to jury trial.[182]The report includes the testimony of Judge Walter Clark, Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of North Carolina:Chairman Walsh. Have you studied the effect of the use of injunctions in labor disputes generally in the United States, as a student of economics and the law?Judge Clark. I do not think they can be justified, sir, * * * [Their effect] has been, of course, to irritate the men, because they feel that in an anglo-Saxon community every man has a right to a trial by jury and that to take him up and compel him to be tried by a judge, is not in accordance with the principles of equality, liberty, and justice.Chairman Walsh. Do you think that has been one of the causes of social unrest in the United States?Judge Clark. Yes, sir, and undoubtedly will be more so, unless it is remedied.[183]The congressional report concludes from this exchange,...opinions cited above are very impressive and are convincing that the workers have great reason for their attitude... such injunctions have in many cases inflicted grievous injury upon workmen engaged in disputes with their employers, and ... their interests have been seriously prejudiced by the denial of jury trial, which every criminal is afforded, and by trial before the judge against whom the contempt was alleged ... It is felt to be a duty, therefore, to register a solemn protest against this condition...By most accounts, in spite of its apparent candor, the U.S. Congress failed to act upon this investigation of the reasons for industrial unrest.One significant difference between the IWW and mainstream unions (specifically, the AFL) concerns their interpretation of, and reaction to the law. Laws are passed by the state. AFL unions concerned themselves with issues of law and order.[147] In the eyes of the IWW, the state was variously considered irrelevant, illegitimate, or merely an extension of capitalist power.[184] The IWW Preamble and Constitution, which encapsulate the organization's philosophy and to some extent, formulate policy, are silent on the specific question of government, yielding only a strong implication that government as constituted would cease to exist in a Wobbly world (a "new society within the shell of the old").[185]To Wobblies beaten by cops while picketing the job, the only law that mattered was the law of the jungle.[186] In the words of historian Melvyn Dubofsky, the AFL sought industrial harmony, the IWW praised perpetual industrial war.[147]Dubofsky concludes that while Wobbly speechmaking often created a wrong perception of IWW intentions and practices, the IWW actually practiced passive resistance and promoted non-violence.[187] Yet passive resistance is distinct from pacifism. Dubofsky wrote,Nonviolence was only a means to an end. If passive resistance resulted only in beatings and deaths, then the IWW threatened to respond in kind.[188]Arturo Giovannitti summarized his perception of the Wobbly philosophy, "The generally accepted notion seems to be that to kill is a great crime, but to be killed is the greatest."[188]Labor legislation can have a very significant impact upon union organizing, and efforts to organize the coal industry offer a good example. Coal miners had been struggling for sixty years to organize unions in the Western United States, with little success.[98] All of that changed in the early 1930s when the companies began to perceive a difference between the business unionism of the United Mine Workers, and their more radical competitors.In 1933, Franklin Delano Roosevelt established the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) including Section 7(a), guaranteeing the right to collective bargaining.[189] The law originated with the coal industry, which had been beset by organizing drives by radical labor organizations such as the Industrial Workers of the World (Colorado strike in 1927), the Progressive Miners in Illinois, the West Virginia Mine Workers Union, and the National Miners Union (formed in 1928), which also was founded on the principles of class struggle.[190] Facing such stiff competition, the AFL-affiliated United Mine Workers was a "shambles" during this period, with its membership having dropped to less than a quarter of its former strength.[191]After decades of hostility toward unions, in 1931 the coal industry's magazine, Coal Age, began editorializing in favor of the "desired stabilization of wages and working conditions [via] recognition and acceptance of an outside labor organization."[192] John L. Lewis, President of the United Mine Workers, later claimed that his union had written the language that ultimately appeared in the NIRA.[191] The NIRA favored a specific type of industrial union, and greatly increased the barriers to organizing radical unions.[193]The United Mine Workers union was also supported by the government and by some coal companies against their more radical rivals.[194] In some cases, the United Mine Workers legitimized strike breaking by issuing union cards to miners who had crossed picket lines of a rival organization.[195] By 1936, the United Mine Workers had gained contracts with all the major coal operators in North America.In U.S. legal terminology, the concept of minority unionism refers to the situation in which workers who wish to engage in concerted activity, which means action taken by workers for mutual aid or protection. In the U.S., such activity is protected by federal labor law.[196] Generally speaking, concerted activity takes place, and is therefore protected, whenever two or more employees act together to improve their terms and conditions of employment. (The protections are fairly broad, although corporations frequently benefit from employees not knowing their rights.)According to union activists, workers engaging in concerted activity may also be said to be engaging in minority unionism. While the status of concerted activity is well established, the precise legal status of bargaining rights for a minority union, or alternatively of bargaining rights for individual members of such a union, is not clear. In 2005, Charles Morris published a legal treatise called The Blue Eagle At Work: Reclaiming Democratic Rights in the American Workplace which offers an as yet untested legal theory about minority unionism.[197]However, the Industrial Workers of the World have held from the organization's founding that workers, whether in a majority or not, nonetheless have the right and the ability to join together to act in their own best interest, whether through traditional bargaining, or by other means. This is quite different from more orthodox unions, which typically rely upon union recognition by a workplace majority and a collective bargaining agreement, accompanied by dues checkoff and other conventions, before they will represent a group of employees.The IWW relies upon members to submit dues voluntarily, instead of relying on the "dues check off" system, in which dues are automatically deducted from workers' paychecks by their employer. Throughout the organization's history, a constitutional provision has prohibited IWW organizations from allowing employers to handle union dues.IWW dues collection most typically operates according to the Job Delegate system, which was developed by the Agricultural Workers Organization (AWO) of the IWW.The Industrial Workers of the World has enjoyed and occasionally suffered from a distinctive public image. The organization has been chronicled in fiction as varied as Zane Grey's anti-Wobbly book Desert of Wheat, and James Jones' influential 1951 novel, From Here to Eternity.[198] Conlin attributes some of the chronicles to "fascination with the vitality of those on the bottom.[199] He notes, however, that a romantic image of the Wobblies was not ever entirely inappropriate. For example, Haywood was frequently the recipient of invitations from Mabel Dodge Luhan and "other fashionable literati," and "a romanticized IWW" was the subject of books and poems throughout the 1910s.[199] Conlin observes that "no later than 1908, the Wobblies were vividly conscious of their romantic aspect and took easily to self-dramatization."[199] This was evident in their singing, in their song parodies, in their skits, in their poetry and in their cartoons. From soap boxing to the Paterson pageant, from their colorful lingo to "building the battleship" in the free speech fight jails, Wobblies seemed to instinctively comprehend the benefits of publicity for their cause.Conlin does note, however, that shortly after the 1913 Paterson Pageant at Madison Square Garden, the IWW officially disclaimed the utility of such productions, and "turned to more proper union activity" (in a period which coincided with the organization's dramatic growth) until the "apocalypse" of government intervention in 1917-18.[200]1 Wobbly understanding of the world

1.1 Inspiration

1.1 Inspiration2 The question of political action3 Early philosophy a compromise4 IWW versus the AFL5 The IWW philosophy evolves

5.1 Two guiding principles
5.2 For and against the system
5.3 Political parties and union
5.4 On war
5.5 IWW ideology and socialism
5.6 To be syndicalist, or not to be syndicalist?
5.7 Anarchist swing?
5.8 Anarcho-syndicalism
5.9 The contract question

5.9.1 No-strike clause



5.1 Two guiding principles5.2 For and against the system5.3 Political parties and union5.4 On war5.5 IWW ideology and socialism5.6 To be syndicalist, or not to be syndicalist?5.7 Anarchist swing?5.8 Anarcho-syndicalism5.9 The contract question

5.9.1 No-strike clause

5.9.1 No-strike clause6 IWW tactics and action

6.1 Direct action

6.1.1 Soapboxing and free speech fights
6.1.2 Conventional strikes

6.1.2.1 Colorado coal strike (a case study)


6.1.3 Intermittant strikes, short strikes
6.1.4 Sit-down strikes
6.1.5 Boycotts
6.1.6 General strike

6.1.6.1 Industrial democracy


6.1.7 Strike on the job
6.1.8 Silent strike, slowdown, exceptional obedience (work to rule)
6.1.9 Sabotage
6.1.10 Violence

6.1.10.1 Violence and sabotage as tactics


6.1.11 Legislation, injunctions and the law


6.2 Minority unionism
6.3 Dues collection

6.1 Direct action

6.1.1 Soapboxing and free speech fights
6.1.2 Conventional strikes

6.1.2.1 Colorado coal strike (a case study)


6.1.3 Intermittant strikes, short strikes
6.1.4 Sit-down strikes
6.1.5 Boycotts
6.1.6 General strike

6.1.6.1 Industrial democracy


6.1.7 Strike on the job
6.1.8 Silent strike, slowdown, exceptional obedience (work to rule)
6.1.9 Sabotage
6.1.10 Violence

6.1.10.1 Violence and sabotage as tactics


6.1.11 Legislation, injunctions and the law

6.1.1 Soapboxing and free speech fights6.1.2 Conventional strikes

6.1.2.1 Colorado coal strike (a case study)

6.1.2.1 Colorado coal strike (a case study)6.1.3 Intermittant strikes, short strikes6.1.4 Sit-down strikes6.1.5 Boycotts6.1.6 General strike

6.1.6.1 Industrial democracy

6.1.6.1 Industrial democracy6.1.7 Strike on the job6.1.8 Silent strike, slowdown, exceptional obedience (work to rule)6.1.9 Sabotage6.1.10 Violence

6.1.10.1 Violence and sabotage as tactics

6.1.10.1 Violence and sabotage as tactics6.1.11 Legislation, injunctions and the law6.2 Minority unionism6.3 Dues collection7 Publicity and the Wobbly image8 See also9 References1.1 Inspiration5.1 Two guiding principles5.2 For and against the system5.3 Political parties and union5.4 On war5.5 IWW ideology and socialism5.6 To be syndicalist, or not to be syndicalist?5.7 Anarchist swing?5.8 Anarcho-syndicalism5.9 The contract question

5.9.1 No-strike clause

5.9.1 No-strike clause5.9.1 No-strike clause6.1 Direct action

6.1.1 Soapboxing and free speech fights
6.1.2 Conventional strikes

6.1.2.1 Colorado coal strike (a case study)


6.1.3 Intermittant strikes, short strikes
6.1.4 Sit-down strikes
6.1.5 Boycotts
6.1.6 General strike

6.1.6.1 Industrial democracy


6.1.7 Strike on the job
6.1.8 Silent strike, slowdown, exceptional obedience (work to rule)
6.1.9 Sabotage
6.1.10 Violence

6.1.10.1 Violence and sabotage as tactics


6.1.11 Legislation, injunctions and the law

6.1.1 Soapboxing and free speech fights6.1.2 Conventional strikes

6.1.2.1 Colorado coal strike (a case study)

6.1.2.1 Colorado coal strike (a case study)6.1.3 Intermittant strikes, short strikes6.1.4 Sit-down strikes6.1.5 Boycotts6.1.6 General strike

6.1.6.1 Industrial democracy

6.1.6.1 Industrial democracy6.1.7 Strike on the job6.1.8 Silent strike, slowdown, exceptional obedience (work to rule)6.1.9 Sabotage6.1.10 Violence

6.1.10.1 Violence and sabotage as tactics

6.1.10.1 Violence and sabotage as tactics6.1.11 Legislation, injunctions and the law6.2 Minority unionism6.3 Dues collection6.1.1 Soapboxing and free speech fights6.1.2 Conventional strikes

6.1.2.1 Colorado coal strike (a case study)

6.1.2.1 Colorado coal strike (a case study)6.1.3 Intermittant strikes, short strikes6.1.4 Sit-down strikes6.1.5 Boycotts6.1.6 General strike

6.1.6.1 Industrial democracy

6.1.6.1 Industrial democracy6.1.7 Strike on the job6.1.8 Silent strike, slowdown, exceptional obedience (work to rule)6.1.9 Sabotage6.1.10 Violence

6.1.10.1 Violence and sabotage as tactics

6.1.10.1 Violence and sabotage as tactics6.1.11 Legislation, injunctions and the law6.1.2.1 Colorado coal strike (a case study)6.1.6.1 Industrial democracy6.1.10.1 Violence and sabotage as tactics*Philip S. Foner disagreed with Dubofsky on this one point, stating, "[t]he I.W.W. did not, as did many, if not all, anarchists, advocate 'propaganda of the deed'."[11] Taft and Ross likewise appear to disagree with Dubofsky, stating in more general terms, "violence in labor disputes was seldom inspired by the doctrine of 'propaganda by the deed,' whose self-defeating nature convinced many of its exponents of its fallacy."[12] The difference may depend upon how 'propaganda of the deed' is defined.general strike in an industry;general strike in a community;general national strike.[95]Anti-union violenceLabor federation competition in the United StatesOne Big Union (concept)The Social Network is a 2010 American drama film directed by David Fincher and written by Aaron Sorkin. Adapted from Ben Mezrich's 2009 book The Accidental Billionaires, the film portrays the founding of social networking website Facebook and the resulting lawsuits. It stars Jesse Eisenberg as founder Mark Zuckerberg, along with Andrew Garfield as Eduardo Saverin and Justin Timberlake as Sean Parker, the other principals involved in the website's creation. Neither Zuckerberg nor any other Facebook staff were involved with the project, although Saverin was a consultant for Mezrich's book.[3] The film was released in the United States by Columbia Pictures on October 1, 2010.The film received widespread acclaim, with critics praising it for its editing, acting, score, direction and screenplay. However, some people, including Zuckerberg himself, criticized the film for its many inaccuracies. The Social Network appeared on 78 critics' Top 10 list for 2010; of those critics, 22 had the film in their number-one spot. Rolling Stone's Peter Travers said "The Social Network is the movie of the year. But Fincher and Sorkin triumph by taking it further. Lacing their scathing wit with an aching sadness, they define the dark irony of the past decade."It received eight Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture, Best Director (Fincher), and Best Actor (Eisenberg), and won three for Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Original Score, and Best Film Editing. At the 68th Golden Globe Awards, the film won Best Motion Picture  Drama, Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best Original Score.In 2003, Harvard University student Mark Zuckerberg (Jesse Eisenberg) is dumped by his girlfriend Erica Albright (Rooney Mara) at a bar. He returns to his dorm drunk and writes a blog entry about her. This inspires him to create an on-campus website called Facemash which allows users to rate the attractiveness of female students using photographs pilfered from various university systems. Mark receives six months of academic probation after traffic to the site crashes parts of Harvard's network. Facemash's popularity and the fact that Mark created it in one night while drunk brings him to the attention of Cameron and Tyler Winklevoss (both portrayed by Armie Hammer) and their business partner Divya Narendra (Max Minghella). The Winklevoss twins invite Mark to their final club, where Mark accepts a job as programmer for a proposed dating website they call Harvard Connection which will be exclusive to Harvard alumni.Mark approaches his friend Eduardo Saverin (Andrew Garfield) and tells him of his idea for what he calls "Thefacebook", an online social networking website exclusive to Harvard University students. He explains that this would mimic the popularity of FaceMash but since signing up would be consensual it would avoid the ethical problems of the earlier site. Eduardo agrees to help Mark, providing $1,000 to help start the site. They distribute the link to Eduardo's connections at the Phoenix S-K final club, and it becomes popular throughout the student body. When they learn of Thefacebook, the Winklevoss twins and Narendra believe Zuckerberg has stolen their idea while stalling on their website. Tyler and Divya want to sue Mark for intellectual property theft, but Cameron convinces them to settle the matter as "Gentlemen of Harvard".During a visiting lecture by Bill Gates (Steve Sires), fellow Harvard University student Christy Lee (Brenda Song) introduces herself and her friend Alice (Malese Jow) to Eduardo and Mark and asks the boys to "Facebook me". Christy's use of this phrase impresses both of them. Christy invites them to a bar, where Mark runs into Erica, who is not aware of Thefacebook because she is not a Harvard student. Mark decides to expand the site to Yale University, Columbia University and Stanford University as Thefacebook grows in popularity, while the Winklevoss twins and Narendra watch "their idea" advance without them. Cameron refuses to sue them, instead accusing Mark of violating the Harvard student Code of Conduct. Through their father Howard's (John Hayden) connections, they meet with Harvard President Larry Summers (Douglas Urbanski), who is dismissive towards the twins and sees no potential value in either a disciplinary action or in Thefacebook website itself.Through Christy, now Eduardo's girlfriend, Eduardo and Mark arrange a meeting with Napster co-founder Sean Parker (Justin Timberlake). Eduardo becomes skeptical, noting Sean's problematic personal and professional history. Sean presents a vision for Facebook very similar to that of Mark, which earns Mark's instant admiration. In a parting comment, Sean suggests they drop the "The" from Thefacebook, saying it looks cleaner without the 'The'.At Sean's suggestion, Mark moves the company to Palo Alto while Eduardo remains in New York seeking advertising support. Sean advises Mark to keep hold of his ownership of Facebook to ensure that Mark does not lose control of a potentially lucrative business venture. After Sean promises to expand Facebook to two continents, Mark invites Sean to live at the house he is using as the company headquarters.While competing in the Henley Royal Regatta for Harvard, the Winklevoss twins discover Facebook has expanded to a number of English universities and footage of their lost rowing race final against the Hollandia Roeiclub is posted on it. Cameron relents and they decide to sue. When Eduardo visits from New York, he is angered to find Sean living in their house and making business decisions for Facebook. Eduardo argues with Mark, with Mark making a demeaning remark regarding Eduardo's failed attempts to find advertisers. Eduardo freezes the company's bank account out of anger and returns to New York.Eduardo has been dismayed to learn that his girlfriend Christy is "psychotic," as he terms it. Upon his return to New York, Christy angrily confronts Eduardo about his Facebook profile, which lists him as "single". She refuses to believe Eduardo when he reluctantly explains that he does not know how to change his profile. She accuses him of cheating on her and sets fire to a scarf he gave to her. While Eduardo extinguishes the fire she caused, Mark reveals on the phone that although he was upset that Eduardo almost jeopardized Facebook by freezing the bank account, they have secured $500,000 from angel investor Peter Thiel (Wallace Langham). Eduardo breaks up with Christy and returns to California.While visiting the new headquarters for a meeting, Eduardo discovers the deal he signed with Sean's investors has allowed them to dilute his share of the company from 34 percent to 0.03 percent, while maintaining the ownership percentage of all other parties. He confronts Mark and announces his intention to sue him. During a party celebrating Facebook's one millionth member, Sean and a number of underage Facebook interns are arrested for possession of cocaine. Sean tries deceiving Mark into believing that he had nothing to do with the incident and that Eduardo stashed the cocaine, but Mark does not believe him and tells him to "go home".The story is intercut with scenes from depositions taken in lawsuits against Mark and Facebookone filed by the Winklevoss twins, the other by Eduardo. The Winklevoss twins claim that Zuckerberg stole their idea, while Saverin claims his shares of Facebook were unfairly diluted when the company was incorporated. At the end, Marylin Delpy (Rashida Jones), a junior lawyer for the defense, informs Mark they will be settling with Eduardo, since the sordid details of Facebook's founding and Mark's callous attitude will make a jury highly unsympathetic. After everyone leaves, Mark sends a friend request to Erica Albright on Facebook, and refreshes the page every few seconds waiting for a response.An epilogue reveals the following information: Cameron and Tyler Winklevoss received a settlement of $65 million, signed a non-disclosure agreement, and rowed in the 2008 Beijing Olympics, placing sixth; Eduardo Saverin received a settlement of an unknown amount and his name was restored to the Facebook masthead as a Co-founder of Facebook; the website has over 500 million members in 207 countries and is valued at 25 billion dollars; and Mark Zuckerberg is the world's youngest billionaire.Screenwriter Aaron Sorkin said, "What attracted me to [the film project] had nothing to do with Facebook. The invention itself is as modern as it gets, but the story is as old as storytelling; the themes of friendship, loyalty, jealousy, class and power. [...] I got a 14-page book proposal that Ben Mezrich had written for his publisher for a book he was going to call The Accidental Billionaires. The publisher was simultaneously shopping it around for a film sale. That's how it wound up in my hands. I was reading it and somewhere on page three I said yes. It was the fastest I said yes to anything. But Ben hadn't written the book yet, and I assumed that Sony was going to want me to wait for Ben to write the book, and I would start a year from now. They wanted me to start right away. Ben and I were kind of doing our research at the same time, sort of along parallel lines."[6]However, according to Sorkin, Mezrich did not send him material from his book as he wrote it: "Two or three times we'd get together. I'd go to Boston, or we'd meet in New York and kind of compare notes and share information, but I didn't see the book until he was done with it. By the time I saw the book, I was probably 80 percent done with the screenplay."[6] Sorkin elaborated:Casting began in early August 2009, and open auditions were held in various states. Jesse Eisenberg was first announced to be attached to the project in September 2009.[7] (Coincidentally, in an interview with Diane Sawyer on ABC's World News with Diane Sawyer, Zuckerberg revealed that Eisenberg's cousin, Eric Fisher, was a Facebook product designer.) Several days later, Justin Timberlake and Andrew Garfield were confirmed to portray the roles of Sean Parker and Eduardo Saverin, respectively. In October 2009, Brenda Song, Rooney Mara, Armie Hammer, Shelby Young, and Josh Pence were cast.[8] Max Minghella and Dakota Johnson were also confirmed to star in the film.[8] In a 2009 interview with The Baltimore Sun, Eisenberg said, "Even though I've gotten to be in some wonderful movies, this character seems so much more overtly insensitive in so many ways that seem more real to me in the best way. I don't often get cast as insensitive people, so it feels very comfortable: fresh and exciting, as if you never have to worry about the audience. Not that I worry about the audience anyway  it should be just the furthest thing from your mind. The Social Network is the biggest relief I've ever had in a movie".[9]Principal photography began in October 2009 in Cambridge, Massachusetts.[10] Scenes were filmed around the campuses of two Massachusetts prep schools, Phillips Academy and Milton Academy.[11] Additional scenes were filmed on the campus of Wheelock College, which was set up to be Harvard's campus.[12] (Harvard has turned down most requests for on-location filming ever since the filming of Love Story (1970), which caused significant physical damage to the campus.)[13] Filming took place on the Keyser and Wyman quadrangles in the Homewood campus of Johns Hopkins University from November 24,[14] which also doubled for Harvard in the film.[15] The first scene in the film, where Zuckerberg is with his girlfriend, took 99 takes to finish.[3] The film was shot on the Red One digital cinema camera at 4K resolution.[16] The rowing scenes with the Winklevoss brothers were filmed at Community Rowing Inc. in Newton, Massachusetts[17] and at the Henley Royal Regatta.[18] Although a significant portion of the latter half of the film is set in Silicon Valley, the filmmakers opted to shoot those scenes in Los Angeles and Pasadena. Miniature faking process was used in a sequence showing a rowing event at the Henley Royal Regatta.Armie Hammer, who portrayed the Winklevoss twins, acted alongside body double Josh Pence while his scenes were filmed. His face was later digitally grafted onto Pence's face during post-production, while other scenes used split-screen photography. Pence himself appears in a cameo role.[19] Pence was concerned about having no face time during the role, but after consideration thought of the role as a "no-brainer".[20] Hammer states that director David Fincher "likes to push himself and likes to push technology" and is "one of the most technologically minded guys I've ever seen."[19] This included sending the actors to "twin boot camp" for 10 months to learn everything about the Winklevosses.[20]Lead actors Jesse Eisenberg and Andrew Garfield formed a close friendship during filming, which Eisenberg has stated made the filming of more emotional scenes difficult because he was upset by Garfield's heartbreaking performance yet had to remain unresponsive and in character.[citation needed]Community Rowing Inc. held a casting call and a tryout for 20 rowing extras; some were graduates from Harvard, Northeastern University, Boston University, George Washington University, and Trinity College, as well as local club rowers from Union Boat Club and Riverside Boat Club.[21] None of the cast rowing extras for the Henley Royal Regatta racing scene appeared in the film; filming for the race was originally planned to take place in Los Angeles, but Fincher decided to film in New England during production.[22]David Fincher hired Loyola Marymount coach Dawn Reagan to help train Josh Pence and Armie Hammer.[23] While Hammer was new to the sport, Pence rowed previously at Dartmouth College.[23]The extras in pairs for the Charles River scene were cast as follows:The indoor rowing scene was filmed at Boston University's indoor rowing tanks. All of BU's blue oars in the scene were repainted to Harvard's crimson color for filming. Dan Boyne was the official rowing consultant for the film both in the US and the UK.[22]On June 1, 2010, it was announced that Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross would score the film.[24] The soundtrack was released September 28 in various formats under the Null Corporation label.[25] Leading up to the release of the soundtrack, a free five-track EP was made available for download.[26] The White Stripes' song "Ball and Biscuit" can be heard in the opening of the film and The Beatles' song "Baby, You're a Rich Man" concludes the film. Neither song appears on the soundtrack.Reznor and Ross won the award for Best Original Score at the 2011 Golden Globe Awards,[27] as well as the 2011 Academy Award for Best Original Score.The film itself contains 18 songs,[28] some of which are not found on the soundtrack. These include songs from The Beatles, Bob Marley, Super Furry Animals, 10cc, Gluecifer, Dead Kennedys, and The White Stripes.The background song used in the club scene (in California) is performed by Dennis de Laat, and is called "Sound of Violence (Main Mix)".[29] It does not appear on the soundtrack.The first theatrical poster was released on June 18, 2010.[30] The film's first teaser trailer was released on June 25, 2010.[31] The second teaser was released on July 8.[32] The full length theatrical trailer debuted on July 15, 2010, which plays an edited version of the song "Creep", originally by Radiohead, covered by the Belgian choir group Scala & Kolacny Brothers.[33][34] The trailer was then shown in theaters, prior to the films Inception, Dinner for Schmucks, Salt, Easy A, The Virginity Hit, and The Other Guys. The theatrical trailer, put together by Mark Woollen & Associates, won the Grand Key Art award at the 2011 Key Art Awards,[35] sponsored by The Hollywood Reporter, and was also featured on The Film Informant's Perfect 10 Trailers in 2010.[36]The script was leaked online in July 2009.[37][38] In November 2009, executive producer Kevin Spacey said, "The Social Network is probably going to be a lot funnier than people might expect it to be."[39] The Cardinal Courier stated that the film was about "greed, obsession, unpredictability and sex" and asked "although there are over 500 million Facebook users, does this mean Facebook can become a profitable blockbuster movie?"[40] At the D8 conference hosted by D: All Things Digital on June 2, 2010, host Kara Swisher told Zuckerberg she knew he was not happy with The Social Network being based on him, to which he replied, "I just wished that nobody made a movie of me while I was still alive."[41] Zuckerberg stated to Oprah Winfrey that the drama and partying of the film is mostly fiction, explaining "this is my life, so I know it's not so dramatic," and that he spent most of the past six years focusing, working hard, and coding Facebook.[42] Speaking to an audience at Stanford University, Zuckerberg stated that the film portrayed his motivations for creating Facebook inaccurately; instead of an effort to "get girls", he says he created the site because he enjoys "building things".[43] However, he added that the film accurately depicted his real-life wardrobe, saying, "It's interesting the stuff that they focused on getting right  like every single shirt and fleece they had in that movie is actually a shirt or fleece that I own."[43]Facebook co-founder Dustin Moskovitz called the film a "dramatization of history ... it is interesting to see my past rewritten in a way that emphasizes things that didn't matter, (like the Winklevosses, who I've still never even met and had no part in the work we did to create the site over the past 6 years) and leaves out things that really did (like the many other people in our lives at the time, who supported us in innumerable ways)".[44] According to Moskovitz:Co-founder Eduardo Saverin said of the film, "[...] the movie was clearly intended to be entertainment and not a fact-based documentary."[46]Sorkin has stated that, "I dont want my fidelity to be to the truth; I want it to be to storytelling. What is the big deal about accuracy purely for accuracys sake, and can we not have the true be the enemy of the good?"[47]Journalist Jeff Jarvis acknowledged the film was "well-crafted" but called it "the anti-social movie", objecting to Sorkin's decision to change various events and characters for dramatic effect, and dismissing it as "the story that those who resist the change society is undergoing want to see."[48] Technology broadcaster Leo Laporte concurred, calling the film "anti-geek and misogynistic".[49] Sorkin responded to these allegations by saying, "I was writing about a very angry and deeply misogynistic group of people".[50]Andrew Clark of The Guardian wrote that "there's something insidious about this genre of [docudrama] scriptwriting," wondering if "a 26-year-old businessman really deserves to have his name dragged through the mud in a murky mixture of fact and imagination for the general entertainment of the movie-viewing public?" Clark added, "I'm not sure whether Mark Zuckerberg is a punk, a genius or both. But I won't be seeing The Social Network to find out."[51]Several noteworthy tech journalists and bloggers voiced their opinions of how the film portrays its real-life characters. Mashable founder and CEO Pete Cashmore, blogging for CNN, said: "If the Facebook founder [Zuckerberg] is concerned about being represented as anything but a genius with an industrious work ethic, he can breathe a sigh of relief."[52] Jessi Hempel, a technology writer for Fortune who says she's known Zuckerberg "for a long time", wrote of the film:The real-life Zuckerberg was maniacally focused on building a web site that could potentially connect everyone on the planetBy contrast, in the film he seems more obsessed with achieving the largesse that bad boy Sean Parker, an original Napster founder, portrays when he arrives to meet Zuckerberg at a New York restaurant.[53]Harvard Law School professor Lawrence Lessig wrote in The New Republic that Sorkin's screenplay does not acknowledge the "real villain" of the story:The total and absolute absurdity of the world where the engines of a federal lawsuit get cranked up to adjudicate the hurt feelings (because "our idea was stolen!") of entitled Harvard undergraduates is completely missed by Sorkin. We can't know enough from the film to know whether there was actually any substantial legal claim here. Sorkin has been upfront about the fact that there are fabrications aplenty lacing the story. But from the story as told, we certainly know enough to know that any legal system that would allow these kids to extort $65 million from the most successful business this century should be ashamed of itself. Did Zuckerberg breach his contract? Maybe, for which the damages are more like $650, not $65 million. Did he steal a trade secret? Absolutely not. Did he steal any other "property"? Absolutely not  the code for Facebook was his, and the "idea" of a social network is not a patent. It wasn't justice that gave the twins $65 million; it was the fear of a random and inefficient system of law. That system is a tax on innovation and creativity. That tax is the real villain here, not the innovator it burdened.[54]In an onstage discussion with The Huffington Post co-founder Arianna Huffington, during Advertising Week 2010 in New York, Facebook's Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg said she had seen the film and it was "very Hollywood" and mainly "fiction". "In real life, he [Zuckerberg] was just sitting around with his friends in front of his computer, ordering pizza," she declared. "Who wants to go see that for two hours?"[55]Divya Narendra said that he was "initially surprised" to see himself portrayed by the non-Indian actor Max Minghella, but also admitted that the actor did a "good job in pushing the dialogue forward and creating a sense of urgency in what was a very frustrating period."[56]During its opening weekend in the United States, the film debuted at No. 1, grossing $22.4 million in 2,771 theaters.[2] The film retained the top spot in its second weekend, dropping only 31.2%,[2] breaking Inception's 32.0% record as the smallest second weekend drop for any number-one film of 2010, while being the third-smallest overall behind Secretariat's 25.1% drop and Tooth Fairy's 28.6% drop. As of August 19, 2011, the film has grossed $96,962,694 in the United States and $127,957,621 elsewhere, for a worldwide total of $224,920,315.[2]The Social Network was released on DVD and Blu-ray January 11, 2011. In its first week of release, DVD sales totaled $13,470,305 and it was the number one sold DVD of the week.[57] The DVD includes an audio commentary with director David Fincher, and a second commentary with writer Aaron Sorkin and the cast. The Blu-ray and 2-Disc DVD releases include the commentaries, along with a feature length documentary, How Did They Ever Make a Movie of Facebook?, featurettes, Angus Wall, Kirk Baxter and Ren Klyce on Post, Trent Reznor, Atticus Ross and David Fincher on the Score, In the Hall of the Mountain King: Reznor's First Draft, Swarmatron, Jeff Cronenweth and David Fincher on the Visuals, and a Ruby Skye VIP Room: Multi-Angle Scene Breakdown feature.[58]The Social Network has received extremely positive reviews from film critics. Review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes reports that 96% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 272 reviews, with an average score of 9/10 and a critical consensus of: "Impeccably scripted, beautifully directed, and filled with fine performances, The Social Network is a riveting, ambitious example of modern filmmaking at its finest." It has a 100% among "Top Critics".[59] The film also holds a score of 95 based on 42 reviews on Metacritic, indicating "universal acclaim" and making it one of the site's highest-rated movies of all time.[60]Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times, giving it four stars and naming it the best film of the year, wrote: "David Fincher's film has the rare quality of being not only as smart as its brilliant hero, but in the same way. It is cocksure, impatient, cold, exciting and instinctively perceptive."[61] Peter Travers of Rolling Stone, gave the film his first full four star rating of the year and said: "The Social Network is the movie of the year. But Fincher and Sorkin triumph by taking it further. Lacing their scathing wit with an aching sadness, they define the dark irony of the past decade."[62] The Harvard Crimson review called it "flawless" and gave it five stars.[63] Quentin Tarantino listed The Social Network as one of his favorite 20 movies of the year, second to Toy Story 3.[64]Some reviewers pointed out that the film plays loosely with the facts behind Facebook's founding. Joe Morgenstern in The Wall Street Journal praised the film as exhilarating but noted: "The biographical part takes liberties with its subject. Aaron Sorkin based his screenplay on a contentious book, Ben Mezrich's The Accidental Billionaires, so everything that's seen isn't necessarily to be believed."[65]The film won Best Picture from the National Society of Film Critics, the New York Film Critics Circle, the Los Angeles Film Critics Association, and the National Board of Review, making it only the third film in history (after Schindler's List and L. A. Confidential) to sweep the "Big Four" critics.[66] The film also won the "Hollywood Ensemble Award" from the Hollywood Awards.[67][68] The Social Network appeared on 78 critics' top 10 lists for 2010, of those critics 22 had the film in their number one spot.[69]The Social Network appeared on over 70 critics' top ten lists of the best films of 2010. Over a dozen publications ranked the film first in their lists.[70]The Social Network won the Best Motion Picture  Drama Golden Globe at the 68th Golden Globe Awards on January 16, 2011.[72] The film also won the awards for Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best Original Score, making it the film with the most wins of the night.[73]The film was nominated for seven British Academy Film Awards, including Best Film, Best Actor in a Leading Role (Jesse Eisenberg), Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Andrew Garfield), and Rising Star Award (Andrew Garfield) won three for Best Editing, Adapted Screenplay, and Best Direction on February 13, 2011.[74]The Social Network received nominations for eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor, Best Cinematography, Best Director, Best Film Editing, Best Original Score, Best Sound, and Best Adapted Screenplay.[75] It won three for Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Original Score, and Best Film Editing at the 83rd Academy Awards on February 27, 2011.Scott RudinDana BrunettiMichael De LucaCen ChaffinJesse EisenbergAndrew GarfieldJustin TimberlakeArmie HammerMax MinghellaTrent ReznorAtticus RossKirk BaxterAngus WallRelativity MediaTrigger Street ProductionsOctober 1, 2010(2010-10-01)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Screenplay
3.2 Casting
3.3 Filming

3.3.1 Rowing production


3.4 Soundtrack

3.1 Screenplay3.2 Casting3.3 Filming

3.3.1 Rowing production

3.3.1 Rowing production3.4 Soundtrack4 Release

4.1 Promotion
4.2 Response by the principals
4.3 Box office
4.4 Home media

4.1 Promotion4.2 Response by the principals4.3 Box office4.4 Home media5 Reception

5.1 Critical response

5.1.1 Top ten lists


5.2 Accolades

5.1 Critical response

5.1.1 Top ten lists

5.1.1 Top ten lists5.2 Accolades6 See also7 References8 External links3.1 Screenplay3.2 Casting3.3 Filming

3.3.1 Rowing production

3.3.1 Rowing production3.4 Soundtrack3.3.1 Rowing production4.1 Promotion4.2 Response by the principals4.3 Box office4.4 Home media5.1 Critical response

5.1.1 Top ten lists

5.1.1 Top ten lists5.2 Accolades5.1.1 Top ten listsJesse Eisenberg as Mark ZuckerbergAndrew Garfield as Eduardo SaverinJustin Timberlake as Sean ParkerArmie Hammer as Cameron and Tyler WinklevossJosh Pence as Tyler Winklevoss (body double for Armie Hammer)Max Minghella as Divya NarendraBrenda Song as Christy LeeRashida Jones as Marylin Delpy[4][5]John Getz as SyDavid Selby as GageDenise Grayson as GretchenDouglas Urbanski as Larry SummersRooney Mara as Erica AlbrightJoseph Mazzello as Dustin MoskovitzDustin Fitzsimons as The Phoenix  S K Club PresidentWallace Langham as Peter ThielDakota Johnson as Amelia RitterMalese Jow as Alice CantwelTrevor Wright as Josh ThompsonShelby Young as K.C.Aaron Sorkin as Ad ExecutiveTom Owston and Joe CarrolHenry Roosevelt and Teddy SchreckTyler Williamson and Matt WebbPerrin Hamilton and Steve BarchickLucas Abegg and Jim Bayley (body doubles for Hammer and Pence)[23]1st Peter Travers, Rolling Stone1st Roger Ebert, Chicago Sun-Times1st Christy Lemire, Associated Press1st Andrea Grunvall, Chicago Reader1st Owen Gleiberman, Lisa Schwarzbaum, Entertainment Weekly1st Betsy Sharkey, Kenneth Turan, Los Angeles Times1st Rene Rodriguez, Miami Herald1st Stephen Holden, The New York Times1st David Denby, The New Yorker1st Now Magazine1st Tim Robey, Telegraph1st Joshua Rothkopf, Time Out New York1st Ann Hornaday, Washington Post1st Joe Morgenstern, Wall Street Journal3rd Richard Roeper, RichardRoeper.com5th Richard Corliss, Time magazine[71]The Winklevoss Chang Group, the alleged partnership between ConnectU and i2hubPirates of Silicon Valley, a 1999 film about the rise of Apple Computer (Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak) and Microsoft (Bill Gates, Steve Ballmer, Paul Allen) from the 1970s to the 1990sOfficial websiteScreenplayThe Social Network at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Social Network at AllRoviThe Social Network at Box Office MojoThe Social Network at Rotten TomatoesThe Social Network at MetacriticInception is a 2010 science fiction/action heist film written, co-produced, and directed by Christopher Nolan. The film stars a large ensemble cast that includes Leonardo DiCaprio, Ken Watanabe, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Marion Cotillard, Ellen Page, Tom Hardy, Dileep Rao, Cillian Murphy, Tom Berenger, and Michael Caine. DiCaprio plays Dom Cobb, a thief who commits corporate espionage by infiltrating the subconscious of his targets. He is offered a chance to regain his old life as payment for a task considered to be impossible: "inception", the implantation of another person's idea into a target's subconscious.[5]Shortly after finishing Insomnia (2002) and long before Batman Begins (2005),[6] Nolan wrote an 80-page treatment about "dream stealers" and presented the idea to Warner Bros., envisioned as a horror film inspired by lucid dreaming.[7] Feeling he needed to have more experience with large-scale film production, Nolan retired the project and instead worked on Batman Begins (2005), The Prestige (2006), and The Dark Knight (2008).[8] He spent six months polishing the script before Warner Bros. purchased it in February 2009.[9] Inception was filmed in six countries and four continents, beginning in Tokyo on June19,2009, and finishing in Canada on November 22, 2009.[10] Its official budget was US$160million, a cost which was split between Warner Bros and Legendary Pictures.[3] Nolan's reputation and success with The Dark Knight helped secure the film's $100million in advertising expenditure,[3] with most of the publicity involving viral marketing.Inception premiered in London on July8,2010, and was released in both conventional and IMAX theaters on July 16, 2010.[11][12] A box office success, Inception has grossed over $800million worldwide becoming one of the highest-grossing films of all time.[4] The home video market also had strong results, with $68million in DVD sales. Inception has received wide critical acclaim and numerous critics have praised its originality, cast, score, and visual effects.[13] It won Academy Awards for Best Visual Effects, Best Sound Editing, Best Sound Mixing, and Best Cinematography, and was also nominated for four more: Best Picture, Best Original Screenplay, Best Original Score, and Best Art Direction.Former dream architect Dominick "Dom" Cobb (Leonardo DiCaprio) and business partner Arthur (Joseph Gordon-Levitt) perform corporate espionage by using an experimental military-developed machine to infiltrate the subconscious of their targets and extract information while the subject dreams, their latest target being powerful Japanese businessman Saito (Ken Watanabe). Tiered dream within a dream strategies are used and dreamers awaken by a sudden "kick" (generally by falling) or by dying in the dream. However, if the dreamer is the one who dies, the dream "collapses". Each extractor carries a totem, a personalized small object the behavior of which is only predictable to its owner, that serves the purpose of identifying whether a dreamer is in someone elses dream or not. Cobb's totem is a spinning top that perpetually spins in the dream state. The extraction fails due to Mallorie "Mal" Cobb (Marion Cotillard), Cobb's deceased wife, whose memory projection sabotages the mission. Saito later reveals, after Cobb's and Arthur's associate (Lukas Haas) sells them out, that he was in fact auditioning the team to perform the difficult act of inception: implanting an idea or thought into a person's subconscious while they are asleep.Saito wishes to break up the energy conglomerate of his ailing competitor Maurice Fischer, by planting the idea in his son and heir Robert Fischer (Cillian Murphy) to disintegrate his father's company. Should Cobb succeed, Saito would use his influence to clear a murder charge against Cobb, so he can return to the U.S. and his children. Cobb accepts the offer and assembles his team: Eames (Tom Hardy), a conman and identity forger; Yusuf (Dileep Rao), a chemist who concocts the powerful sedative for a stable dream within a dream strategy; Ariadne (Ellen Page), a young architecture student tasked with designing the labyrinth of the dream landscapes; and Arthur. Saito accompanies so that he knows whether or not Cobb and his team succeeded in their mission.When the elder Fischer dies in Sydney and his body is flown back to Los Angeles, the team share the flight with Robert Fischer and Cobb sedates him, bringing him into the shared dream. At each stage, the member of the team generating the dream stays behind to initiate the "kick", while the other members sleep within the dream to travel a level deeper. In the first level, Yusuf's rainy downtown dream, the team abducts Fischer. However Fischer's antibody-like trained subconscious projections attack and severely wound Saito. Eames temporarily takes the appearance of Fischer's godfather, Peter Browning, to suggest Fischer reconsider his father's will. Yusuf drives the team in a van as they are sedated into Arthur's dream, a hotel, where the team recruit Fischer, convincing him his kidnapping was orchestrated by Browning. In the third dream level, a snowy mountain fortress dreamed by Eames, Fischer is told they are in Browning's subconscious, but they are, in fact, really going deeper into Fischer's. Yusuf, under assault by trained projections, initiates his kick too soon by driving off a bridge, sending Arthur's dream world into zero-gravity and causing an avalanche in Eames' dream. Arthur is forced to improvise a new kick using an elevator that will be synchronized with the van hitting the water, while the team in Eames' dream races to finish the job before the new round of kicks.Unbeknownst to the rest of the team, due to the effects of heavy sedation and multi-layered dreaming, death during this mission will result in entering Limbo, dream space of unknown content where the dreamer could be trapped indefinitely. Elapsed time in each dream level is, on average, roughly twenty times greater than in the level above it; in Limbo, the deepest level of all, 24 hours of outer-world time would be experienced as about half a century there. Cobb reveals to Ariadne that he spent "50 years" with Mal in Limbo constructing a world out of their shared memories whilst seemingly growing old together. After waking back into our outermost world, Mal remained convinced she was still dreaming and committed suicide, trying to persuade Cobb to do so by retroactively incriminating him in her death. He subsequently fled the U.S. and left his children behind, ostensibly in the care of his father-in-law.Saito finally succumbs to his wounds, and Cobb's projection of Mal sabotages the plan by killing Fischer, sending them both into limbo.[14] Cobb and Ariadne enter limbo to find Fischer and Saito, while Eames remains on his dream level to set up a kick by rigging the fortress with explosives. Cobb confronts his projection of Mal, who tries to convince him to stay in limbo. Cobb refuses and confesses that he was responsible for Mal's suicide: having convinced her to leave limbo by using inception to plant the idea in her mind that the world they had been living in for 50 years was not real, and hence the need to kill themselves in order to return to the real world, once back in the real world she continued to believe dying would wake her. Mal attacks Cobb but Ariadne shoots her. Through his confession, Cobb attains catharsis and chooses to remain in limbo to search for Saito. Ariadne pushes Fischer off a balcony, bringing him back up to the mountain fortress, where he enters a safe room to discover and accept the planted idea: that his father wishes him to be his "own man" and, accordingly, that splitting up the conglomerate might not be such a radical notion after all.All of the team members except Cobb and Saito ride the synchronized kicks back to reality: Ariadne jumps off a balcony in Limbo, Eames detonates the explosives in the fortress, Arthur blasts an elevator containing the team's sleeping bodies up an elevator shaft, and the van in Yusuf's dream hits the water. Saito, who is slowly dying on each level from the initial gun-shot wound, enters Limbo. Cobb eventually finds an aged Saito and the two remember their arrangement, presumably killing themselves and awakening to outer-world reality on the airplane. Saito honors the arrangement and Cobb passes through U.S. customs once the plane lands in Los Angeles. Just before reuniting with his children, Cobb tests reality with his spinning top, but he turns away to greet his children before observing the results. As he plays with his children, the camera pans to the spinning top for the final shot, at which point the film abruptly ends.Initially, Nolan wrote an 80-page treatment about dream-stealers.[6] Originally, Nolan had envisioned Inception as a horror film,[6] but eventually wrote it as a heist film even though he found that "traditionally [they] are very deliberately superficial in emotional terms."[32] Upon revisiting his script, he decided that basing it in that genre did not work because the story "relies so heavily on the idea of the interior state, the idea of dream and memory. I realized I needed to raise the emotional stakes."[32] Nolan worked on the script for nine to ten years.[15] When he first started thinking about making the film, Nolan was influenced by "that era of movies where you had The Matrix (1999), you had Dark City (1998), you had The Thirteenth Floor (1999) and, to a certain extent, you had Memento (2000), too. They were based in the principles that the world around you might not be real."[32]Nolan first pitched the film to Warner Bros. in 2001, but then felt that he needed more experience making large-scale films, and embarked on Batman Begins and The Dark Knight.[8] He soon realized that a film like Inception needed a large budget because "as soon as you're talking about dreams, the potential of the human mind is infinite. And so the scale of the film has to feel infinite. It has to feel like you could go anywhere by the end of the film. And it has to work on a massive scale."[8] After making The Dark Knight, Nolan decided to make Inception and spent six months completing the script.[8] Nolan states that the key to completing the script was wondering what would happen if several people shared the same dream. "Once you remove the privacy, you've created an infinite number of alternative universes in which people can meaningfully interact, with validity, with weight, with dramatic consequences."[33]Leonardo DiCaprio was the first actor to be cast in the film.[15] Nolan had been trying to work with the actor for years and met him several times, but was unable to convince him to appear in any of his films until Inception. DiCaprio finally agreed because he was "intrigued by this concept  this dream-heist notion and how this character's going to unlock his dreamworld and ultimately affect his real life."[34] He read the script and found it to be "very well written, comprehensive but you really had to have Chris in person, to try to articulate some of the things that have been swirling around his head for the last eight years."[8] DiCaprio and Nolan spent months talking about the screenplay. Nolan took a long time re-writing the script in order "to make sure that the emotional journey of his character was the driving force of the movie."[15] On February 11, 2009, it was announced that Warner Bros. purchased Inception, a spec script written by Nolan.[9]Principal photography began in Tokyo on June19,2009, with the scene where Saito first hires Cobb during a helicopter flight over the city.[6][35]The production moved to the United Kingdom and shot in a converted airship hangar in Cardington, Bedfordshire, north of London.[36] There, the hotel bar set which tilted 30 degrees was built.[37] A hotel corridor was also constructed by Guy Hendrix Dyas, the production designer, Chris Corbould, the special effects supervisor, and Wally Pfister, the director of photography, it rotated a full 360degrees to create the effect of alternate directions of gravity for scenes set during the second level of dreaming; where dream-sector physics become chaotic. The idea was inspired by a technique used in Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968). Nolan said, "I was interested in taking those ideas, techniques, and philosophies and applying them to an action scenario".[38] The filmmakers originally planned to make the hallway 40ft (12m) long but as the action sequence became more elaborate, the hallway's length grew to 100ft (30m). The corridor was suspended along eight large concentric rings that were spaced equidistantly outside its walls and powered by two massive electric motors.[36] Joseph Gordon-Levitt, who plays Arthur, spent several weeks learning to fight in a corridor that spun like "a giant hamster wheel".[32] Nolan said of the device, "It was like some incredible torture device; we thrashed Joseph for weeks, but in the end we looked at the footage, and it looks unlike anything any of us has seen before. The rhythm of it is unique, and when you watch it, even if you know how it was done, it confuses your perceptions. It's unsettling in a wonderful way".[32] Gordon-Levitt remembered, "it was six-day weeks of just, like, coming home at night battered ... The light fixtures on the ceiling are coming around on the floor, and you have to choose the right time to cross through them, and if you don't, you're going to fall."[39] On July15,2009, filming took place at University College London library, for the sequences occurring inside a Paris college of architecture in the story.[6]Filming moved to France where they shot Cobb entering the college of architecture (the place used for the entrance was the Muse Galliera) and the pivotal scenes between Ariadne and Cobb, in a bistro (a fictional one set up at the corner of Rue Csar Franck and Rue Bouchut) and then on the Bir-Hakeim bridge.[40] For the explosion that takes place during the bistro scene, the local authorities would not allow the actual use of explosives. High-pressure nitrogen was used to create the effect of a series of explosions. Pfister used six high-speed cameras to capture the sequence from different angles and make sure that they got the shot. The visual effects department then enhanced the sequence, adding more destruction and flying debris. For the "Paris folding" sequence and when Ariadne "creates" the bridges, green screen and CGI were used on location.[40]Tangiers, Morocco, doubled as Mombasa, where Cobb hires Eames and Yusuf. A foot chase was shot in the streets and alleyways of the historic medina quarter.[41] To capture this sequence, Pfister employed a mix of hand-held camera and steadicam work.[42] Tangiers was also used to film an important riot scene during the initial foray into Saito's mind.Filming moved to the Los Angeles area, where some sets were built on a Warner Brothers sound stage, including the interior rooms of Saito's Japanese castle (the exterior was done on a small set built in Malibu beach). The dining room was inspired by the Nijo Castle built around 1603. These sets were inspired by a mix of Japanese architecture and Western influences.[42] The production also staged a multi-vehicle car chase on the streets of downtown Los Angeles, which involved a freight train crashing down the middle of a street.[43] To do this, the filmmakers configured a train engine on the chassis of a tractor trailer. The replica was made from fiberglass molds taken from authentic train parts and then matched in terms of color and design.[44] Also, the car chase was supposed to be set in the midst of a downpour but the L.A. weather stayed typically sunny. The filmmakers were forced to set up elaborate effects (e.g., rooftop water cannons) to give the audience the impression that the weather was overcast and soggy. L.A. was also the site of the climactic scene where a Ford Econoline van flies off the Schuyler Heim Bridge in slow motion.[45] This sequence was filmed on and off for months with the van being shot out of a cannon, according to actor Dileep Rao. Capturing the actors suspended within the van in slow motion took a whole day to film. Once the van landed in the water, the challenge for the actors was not to panic. "And when they ask you to act, it's a bit of an ask," explained Cillian Murphy.[45] The actors had to be underwater for four to five minutes while drawing air from scuba tanks; underwater buddy breathing is shown in this sequence.[45] Cobb's house was in Pasadena. The hotel lobby was filmed at the CAA building in Culver City. Limbo was made on location in Los Angeles and Morocco with the beach scene filmed at Palos Verdes beach with CGI buildings. N Hope St. in Los Angeles was the primary filming location for Limbo, with green screen and CGI being used to create the dream landscape.The final phase of principal photography took place in Alberta in late November2009. The location manager discovered a temporarily closed ski resort, Fortress Mountain.[46] An elaborate set was assembled near the top station of the Canadian chairlift, taking three months to build.[47] The production had to wait for a huge snowstorm, which eventually arrived.[6] The ski-chase sequence was inspired by Nolan's favorite James Bond film, On Her Majesty's Secret Service (1969): "What I liked about it that we've tried to emulate in this film is there's a tremendous balance in that movie of action and scale and romanticism and tragedy and emotion."[48]The film was shot primarily in the anamorphic format on 35 mm film, with key sequences filmed on 65 mm, and aerial sequences in VistaVision. Nolan did not shoot any footage with IMAX cameras as he had with The Dark Knight. "We didn't feel that we were going to be able to shoot in IMAX because of the size of the cameras because this film given that it deals with a potentially surreal area, the nature of dreams and so forth, I wanted it to be as realistic as possible. Not be bound by the scale of those IMAX cameras, even though I love the format dearly".[15] Nolan also chose not to shoot any of the film in 3D as he prefers shooting on film[15] using prime lenses, which is not possible with 3D cameras.[49] Nolan has also criticised the dim image that 3D projection produces, and disputes that traditional film does not allow realistic depth perception, saying "I think it's a misnomer to call it 3D versus 2D. The whole point of cinematic imagery is it's three dimensional... You know 95% of our depth cues come from occlusion, resolution, color and so forth, so the idea of calling a 2D movie a '2D movie' is a little misleading."[50] Nolan did test converting Inception into 3D in post-production but decided that, while it was possible, he lacked the time to complete the conversion to a standard he was happy with.[6][50] In February 2011 Jonathan Liebesman suggested that Warner Bros were attempting a 3D conversion for Blu-ray release.[51]Wally Pfister gave each location and dream level a distinctive look: the mountain fortress appears sterile and cool, the hotel hallways have warm hues, and the scenes in the van are more neutral.[52] This was done to aid the audience's recognition of the narrative's location during the heavily crosscut portion of the film.[52]Nolan has said that the film "deals with levels of reality, and perceptions of reality which is something I'm very interested in. It's an action film set in a contemporary world, but with a slight science-fiction bent to it," while also describing it as "very much an ensemble film structured somewhat as a heist movie. It's an action adventure that spans the globe".[53]For dream sequences in Inception, Nolan used little computer-generated imagery, preferring practical effects whenever possible. Nolan said, "It's always very important to me to do as much as possible in-camera, and then, if necessary, computer graphics are very useful to build on or enhance what you have achieved physically."[54] To this end, visual effects supervisor Paul Franklin built a miniature of the mountain fortress set and then blew it up for the film. For the fight scene that takes place in zero gravity, he used CG-based effects to "subtly bend elements like physics, space and time."[55]The most challenging effect was the "limbo" city level at the end of the film because it continually developed during production. Franklin had artists build concepts while Nolan gave his ideal vision: "Something glacial, with clear modernist architecture, but with chunks of it breaking off into the sea like icebergs".[55] Franklin and his team ended up with "something that looked like an iceberg version of Gotham City with water running through it."[55] They created a basic model of a glacier and then designers created a program that added elements like roads, intersections and ravines until they had a complex, yet organic-looking, cityscape. For the Paris-folding sequence, Franklin had artists producing concept sketches and then they created rough computer animations to give them an idea of what the sequence looked like while in motion. Later during principal photography, Nolan was able to direct Leonardo DiCaprio and Ellen Page based on this rough computer animation Franklin had created. Inception had close to 500 visual effects shots (in comparison, Batman Begins had approximately 620) which is considered minor in comparison to contemporary visual effects epics that can have around 1,500 or 2,000 special effects images.[55]The score for Inception was written by Hans Zimmer,[1] who described his work as "a very electronic,[56] dense score",[57] filled with "nostalgia and sadness" to match Cobb's feelings throughout the film.[58] The music was written simultaneously to filming,[57] and features a guitar sound reminiscent of Ennio Morricone, played by Johnny Marr, former guitarist of The Smiths. dith Piaf's "Non, je ne regrette rien" appears recurringly throughout the film, and Zimmer reworked pieces of the song into cues of the score.[58] A soundtrack album was released on July11,2010 by Reprise Records.[59] The majority of the score was also included in high resolution 5.1 surround sound on the 2nd disc of the 2 disc Blu-ray release [60] Hans Zimmer's music was nominated for an Academy Award in the Best Original Score category in 2011, losing to Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross of The Social Network.[61]In Inception, Nolan wanted to explore "the idea of people sharing a dream space...That gives you the ability to access somebody's unconscious mind. What would that be used and abused for?"[15] The majority of the film's plot takes place in these interconnected dream worlds. This structure creates a framework where actions in the real or dream worlds ripple across others. The dream is always in a state of production, and shifts across the levels as the characters navigate it.[62] By contrast, the world of The Matrix (1999) is an authoritarian, computer-controlled one, alluding to theories of social control developed by Michel Foucault and Jean Baudrillard. Nolan's world has more in common with the works of Gilles Deleuze and Flix Guattari.[62]David Denby in The New Yorker compared Nolan's cinematic treatment of dreams to Luis Buuel's in Belle de Jour (1967) and The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie (1972).[63] He criticised Nolan's "literal-minded" action level sequencing compared to Buuel, who "silently pushed us into reveries and left us alone to enjoy our wonderment, but Nolan is working on so many levels of representation at once that he has to lay in pages of dialogue just to explain what's going on." The latter captures "the peculiar malign intensity of actual dreams."[63]Deirdre Barrett, a dream researcher at Harvard University, said that Nolan did not get every detail accurate regarding dreams, but their illogical, rambling, disjointed plots would not make for a great thriller anyway. However, "he did get many aspects right," she said, citing the scene in which a sleeping Cobb is shoved into a full bath, and in the dream world water gushes into the windows of the building, waking him up. "That's very much how real stimuli get incorporated, and you very often wake up right after that intrusion".[64]Nolan himself said, "I tried to work that idea of manipulation and management of a conscious dream being a skill that these people have. Really the script is based on those common, very basic experiences and concepts, and where can those take you? And the only outlandish idea that the film presents, really, is the existence of a technology that allows you to enter and share the same dream as someone else."[32]Others have argued that the film is itself a metaphor for film-making, and that the filmgoing experience itself, images flashing before one's eyes in a darkened room, is akin to a dream. Writing in Wired, Jonah Lehrer supported this interpretation and presented neurological evidence that brain activity is strikingly similar during film-watching and sleeping. In both, the visual cortex is highly active and the prefrontal cortex, which deals with logic, deliberate analysis, and self-awareness, is quiet.[65] Paul argued that the experience of going to a picturehouse is itself an exercise in shared dreaming, particularly when viewing Inception: the film's sharp cutting between scenes forces the viewer to create larger narrative arcs to stitch the pieces together. This demand of production parallel to consumption of the images, on the part of the audience is analogous to dreaming itself. As in the film's story, in a cinema one enters into the space of another's dream, in this case Nolan's, as with any work of art, one's reading of it is ultimately influenced by one's own subjective desires and subconscious.[62] At Bir-Hakeim bridge in Paris, Ariadne creates an illusion of infinity by adding facing mirrors underneath its struts, Stephanie Dreyfus in la Croix asked "Is this not a strong, beautiful metaphor for the cinema and its power of illusion?"[66]Nolan combined elements from several different film genres into the film, notably science fiction, heist film, and film noir. Marion Cotillard plays "Mal" Cobb, Dom Cobb's projection of his guilt over his deceased wife's suicide. As the film's main antagonist, she is a frequent, malevolent presence in his dreams. Dom is unable to control these projections of her, challenging his abilities as an extractor.[16] Nolan described Mal as "the essence of the femme fatale",[67] the key noir reference in the film. As a "classic femme fatale" her relationship with Cobb is in his mind, a manifestation of Cobb's own neurosis and fear of how little he knows about the woman he loves.[68] DiCaprio praised Cotillard's performance saying that "she can be strong and vulnerable and hopeful and heartbreaking all in the same moment, which was perfect for all the contradictions of her character".[69]Nolan began with the structure of a heist movie, since exposition is an essential element of that genre, though adapted it to have a greater emotional narrative suited to the world of dreams and subconscious.[68] Or, as Denby surmised, "the outer shell of the story is an elaborate caper".[63] Kirstin Thompson argued that exposition was a major formal device in the film. While a traditional heist movie has a heavy dose of exposition at the beginning as the team assembles and the leader explains the plan, in Inception this becomes nearly continuous as the group progresses through the various levels of dreaming.[70] Three-quarters of the film, until the van begins to fall from the bridge, are devoted to explaining its plot. In this way, exposition takes precedence over characterisation. Their relationships are created by their respective skills and roles. Ariadne, like her ancient namesake, creates the maze and guides the others through it, but also helps Cobb navigate his own subconscious, and as the sole student of dream sharing, helps the audience understand the concept of the plot.[71]Nolan drew inspiration from the works of Jorge Luis Borges,[6][72] the anime film Paprika (2006) by the late Satoshi Kon as an influence on the character "Ariadne", and Blade Runner (1982) by Ridley Scott.[73]The film cuts to the closing credits from a shot of the top beginning to wobble (but not falling), inviting speculation about whether the final sequence was reality or another dream. Nolan confirmed that the ambiguity was deliberate, saying "I've been asked the question more times than I've ever been asked any other question about any other film I've made... What's funny to me is that people really do expect me to answer it."[74] The film's script concludes with "Behind him, on the table, the spinning top is STILL SPINNING. And we  FADE OUT"[75] However, Christopher Nolan also said, "I put that cut there at the end, imposing an ambiguity from outside the film. That always felt the right ending to me  it always felt like the appropriate 'kick' to me The real point of the scene  and this is what I tell people  is that Cobb isn't looking at the top. He's looking at his kids. He's left it behind. That's the emotional significance of the thing."[76]In September 2010, Michael Caine, explained his interpretation of the ending, "If I'm there it's real, because I'm never in the dream. I'm the guy who invented the dream."[77] Nolan himself noted that "I choose to believe that Cobb gets back to his kids, because I have young kids. People who have kids definitely read it differently than those who don't".[68] He indicated that the top was not the most crucial element of the ending, saying "I've read plenty of very off-the-wall interpretations... The most important emotional thing about the top spinning at the end is that Cobb is not looking at it. He doesn't care."[68]Warner Bros. spent $100million marketing the film. Unlike most tent-pole films, which are adaptations or sequels, Inception was a totally original property, but Sue Kroll, president of Warner's worldwide marketing, said the company believed it could gain awareness due to the strength of "Christopher Nolan as a brand". Kroll declared that "We don't have the brand equity that usually drives a big summer opening, but we have a great cast and a fresh idea from a filmmaker with a track record of making incredible movies. If you can't make those elements work, it's a sad day."[78] The studio also tried to maintain a campaign of secrecy  as reported by the Senior VP of Interactive Marketing, Michael Tritter, "You have this movie which is going to have a pretty big built in fanbase... but you also have a movie that you are trying to keep very secret. Chris [Nolan] really likes people to see his movies in a theater and not see it all beforehand so everything that you do to market that  at least early on  is with an eye to feeding the interest to fans."[79]A viral marketing campaign was employed for the film. After the revelation of the first teaser trailer, in August2009, the film's official website featured only an animation of Cobb's spinning top. In December, the top toppled over and the website opened the online game Mind Crime, which upon completion revealed Inception's poster.[80] The rest of the campaign unrolled after WonderCon in April2010, where Warner gave away promotional T-shirts featuring the PASIV briefcase used to create the dream space, and had a QR code linking to an online manual of the device.[81] Mind Crime also received a stage2 with more resources, including a hidden trailer for the movie.[82] More pieces of viral marketing began to surface before Inception's release, such as a manual filled with bizarre images and text sent to Wired magazine,[83] and the online publication of posters, ads, phone applications, and strange websites all related to the film.[84][85] Warner also released an online prequel comic, Inception: The Cobol Job.[86]The official trailer released on May10,2010 through Mind Game was extremely well received.[82] It featured an original piece of music, "Mind Heist", by recording artist Zack Hemsey,[87] rather than music from the score.[88] The trailer quickly went viral with numerous mashups copying its style, both by amateurs on sites like YouTube[89] and by professionals on sites such as CollegeHumor.[90][91] On June7,2010, a behind-the-scenes featurette on the film was released in HD on Yahoo! Movies.[92]Inception was released on DVD and Blu-ray on December3,2010, in France,[93] and the week after in the UK and USA (December7,2010).[94][95] Warner Bros. also made available in the United States a limited Blu-ray edition packaged in a metal replica of the PASIV briefcase, which included extras such as a metal replica of the spinning top totem. With a production run of less than 2000, it sold out in one weekend.[96]In a November2010 interview, Nolan expressed his intention to develop a video game set in the Inception world, working with a team of collaborators. He described it as "a longer-term proposition", referring to the medium of video games as "something I've wanted to explore".[97]Inception was released in both conventional and IMAX theaters on July16,2010.[11][99] The film had its world premiere at Leicester Square in London, United Kingdom on July8,2010.[100] In the United States and Canada, Inception was released theatrically in 3,792 conventional theaters and 195 IMAX theaters.[11] The film grossed $21.8million during its opening day on July16,2010, with midnight screenings in 1,500 locations.[101] Overall the film made $62.7million and debuted at No.1 on its opening weekend.[102] Inception's opening weekend gross made it the second-highest-grossing debut for a science-fiction film that was not a sequel, remake or adaptation, behind Avatar's $77million opening weekend gross in 2009.[102] The film held the top spot of the box office rankings in its second and third weekends, with drops of just 32% ($42.7million) and 36% ($27.5million) respectively,[103][104] before dropping to second place in its fourth week, behind The Other Guys.[105]Inception grossed US$292million in the United States and Canada, US$56 in the United Kingdom, Ireland and Malta and US$475million in other countries for a total of $823million.[4] Its five highest-grossing markets after the USA and Canada (US$292) were China (US$68million), the United Kingdom, Ireland and Malta (US$56million), France and the Maghreb region (US$43million), Japan (US$40million) and South Korea (US$38million).[106] It was the sixth-highest grossing film of 2010 in North America,[107] and the fourth-highest internationally, behind Toy Story 3, Alice in Wonderland and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - Part 1.[108] The film currently stands as the 32nd highest-grossing of all time.[109] Inception is the third most lucrative production in Christopher Nolan's career  behind The Dark Knight and The Dark Knight Rises -[110] and the second most for Leonardo DiCaprio  behind Titanic.[111] The film received very positive reviews. Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 86% based on reviews from 284 critics, with an average score of 8/10. The website reported the critical consensus as "smart, innovative, and thrilling," and lauded the film as "that rare summer blockbuster that succeeds viscerally as well as intellectually."[112] Metacritic, another review aggregator, assigned the film a weighted average score of 74 (out of 100) based on 42 reviews from mainstream critics, considered to be "generally favorable reviews."[113] In polls conducted by CinemaScore during the opening weekend cinemagoers gave Inception an average score of "B+".[114]While some critics have tended to view the film as perfectly straightforward, and even criticize its overarching themes as "the stuff of torpid platitudes," online discussion has been much more positive.[115] Heated debate has centered on the ambiguity of the ending, with many critics like Devin Faraci making the case that the film is self-referential and tongue-in-cheek, both a film about film-making and a dream about dreams.[116] Other critics read Inception as Christian allegory and focus on the film's use of religious and water symbolism.[117] Yet other critics, such as Kirsten Thompson, see less value in the ambiguous ending of the film and more in its structure and novel method of storytelling, highlighting Inception as a new form of narrative that revels in "continuous exposition".[118]Whatever its meaning, the film has had excellent reviews in general. Perhaps playing off the film's game imagery, Rolling Stone magazine's Peter Travers called Inception a "wildly ingenious chess game," and concluded "the result is a knockout."[119] In Variety, Justin Chang praised the film as "a conceptual tour de force" and wrote, "applying a vivid sense of procedural detail to a fiendishly intricate yarn set in the labyrinth of the unconscious mind, the writer-director has devised a heist thriller for surrealists, a Jungian's Rififi, that challenges viewers to sift through multiple layers of (un)reality."[120] Jim Vejvoda of IGN rated the film as perfect, deeming it "a singular accomplishment from a filmmaker who has only gotten better with each film."[121] Relevant Magazine's David Roark called it Nolan's greatest accomplishment, saying, "Visually, intellectually and emotionally, Inception is a masterpiece."[122]Empire magazine rated it five stars in the August2010 issue and wrote, "it feels like Stanley Kubrick adapting the work of the great sci-fi author William Gibson ... Nolan delivers another true original: welcome to an undiscovered country."[123] Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B+ rating and Lisa Schwarzbaum wrote, "It's a rolling explosion of images as hypnotizing and sharply angled as any in a drawing by M.C. Escher or a state-of-the-biz videogame; the backwards splicing of Nolan's own Memento looks rudimentary by comparison."[124] The New York Post gave the film a four star rating and Lou Lumenick wrote, "DiCaprio, who has never been better as the tortured hero, draws you in with a love story that will appeal even to non-sci-fi fans."[125] Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times awarded the film a full four stars and said that Inception "is all about process, about fighting our way through enveloping sheets of reality and dream, reality within dreams, dreams without reality. It's a breathtaking juggling act."[126] Richard Roeper, also of the Sun-Times, gave Inception a perfect score of "A+" and called it "one of the best movies of the [21st] century."[127]BBC Radio 5 Live's Mark Kermode named Inception as the best film of 2010, stating "Inception is proof that people are not stupid, that cinema is not trash, and that it is possible for blockbusters and art to be the same thing."[128]In his review for the Chicago Tribune, Michael Phillips gave the film 3 stars out of 4 and wrote, "I found myself wishing Inception were weirder, further out ... the film is Nolan's labyrinth all the way, and it's gratifying to experience a summer movie with large visual ambitions and with nothing more or less on its mind than (as Shakespeare said) a dream that hath no bottom."[129] Time magazine's Richard Corliss wrote the film's "noble intent is to implant one man's vision in the mind of a vast audience ... The idea of moviegoing as communal dreaming is a century old. With Inception, viewers have a chance to see that notion get a state-of-the-art update."[130] Los Angeles Times' Kenneth Turan felt that Nolan was able to blend "the best of traditional and modern filmmaking. If you're searching for smart and nervy popular entertainment, this is what it looks like."[131] USA Today rated the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and Claudia Puig felt that Nolan "regards his viewers as possibly smarter than they areor at least as capable of rising to his inventive level. That's a tall order. But it's refreshing to find a director who makes us stretch, even occasionally struggle, to keep up."[132]Not all reviewers gave the film positive reviews. New York magazine's David Edelstein claimed in his review to "have no idea what so many people are raving about. It's as if someone went into their heads while they were sleeping and planted the idea that Inception is a visionary masterpiece andhold on ... Whoa! I think I get it. The movie is a metaphor for the power of delusional hypea metaphor for itself."[133] Rex Reed of The New York Observer explained the film's development as "pretty much what we've come to expect from summer movies in general and Christopher Nolan movies in particular ... [it] doesn't seem like much of an accomplishment to me."[134] A. O. Scott of The New York Times commented "there is a lot to see in Inception, there is nothing that counts as genuine vision. Mr. Nolan's idea of the mind is too literal, too logical, and too rule-bound to allow the full measure of madness."[135] David Denby, writing in The New Yorker, considered the film not nearly as much fun as Nolan imagined it to be, concluding "Inception is a stunning-looking film that gets lost in fabulous intricacies, a movie devoted to its own workings and to little else."[63]Several sources have noted many plot similarities between the film and the 2004 Uncle Scrooge comic, The Dream of a Lifetime.[136][137][138]Inception appeared on over 273 critics' lists of the top ten films of 2010, being picked as No.1 on 55 of those lists. It was the second most mentioned film behind The Social Network and one of the most critically acclaimed films of 2010, alongside the former, The King's Speech and Black Swan.[139]The film won many awards in technical categories, such as Academy Awards for Best Cinematography, Best Sound Editing, Best Sound Mixing, and Best Visual Effects,[61] and the British Academy Film Awards for Best Production Design, Best Special Visual Effects and Best Sound.[140] In most of its artistic nominations, such as Film, Director and Screenplay at the Oscars, BAFTAs and Golden Globes, the film was defeated by The Social Network and The King's Speech.[61][140][141] However, the film did win the two highest honors for a science fiction or fantasy film: the 2011 Bradbury Award for best dramatic production[142] and the 2011 Hugo Award for best dramatic presentation, long form.[143]July 8, 2010(2010-07-08) (London premiere)July 16, 2010(2010-07-16) (United States)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Locations and sets 
3.3 Cinematography
3.4 Visual effects
3.5 Music

3.1 Development3.2 Locations and sets 3.3 Cinematography3.4 Visual effects3.5 Music4 Themes

4.1 Reality and dreams
4.2 Dreams and cinema

4.1 Reality and dreams4.2 Dreams and cinema5 Cinematic technique

5.1 Genre
5.2 Ending

5.1 Genre5.2 Ending6 Release

6.1 Marketing
6.2 Home media
6.3 Putative video game

6.1 Marketing6.2 Home media6.3 Putative video game7 Reception

7.1 Box office earnings
7.2 Critical reception
7.3 Accolades

7.1 Box office earnings7.2 Critical reception7.3 Accolades8 See also9 References10 Further reading11 External links3.1 Development3.2 Locations and sets 3.3 Cinematography3.4 Visual effects3.5 Music4.1 Reality and dreams4.2 Dreams and cinema5.1 Genre5.2 Ending6.1 Marketing6.2 Home media6.3 Putative video game7.1 Box office earnings7.2 Critical reception7.3 AccoladesLeonardo DiCaprio as Dominic "Dom" Cobb, a professional thief who specializes in conning secrets from his victims by infiltrating their dreams. DiCaprio was the first actor to be cast in the film.[15] Nolan had been trying to work with the actor for years and met him several times, but was unable to convince him to appear in any of his films until Inception.[16] According to Hollywood Reporter, both Brad Pitt and Will Smith were offered the role.[17]Cillian Murphy as Robert Michael Fischer, the heir to a business empire and the team's target.[18] Murphy said Fischer was portrayed as "a petulant child who's in need of a lot of attention from his father, he has everything he could ever want materially, but he's deeply lacking emotionally". The actor also researched the sons of Rupert Murdoch, "to add to that the idea of living in the shadow of someone so immensely powerful".[19]Tom Hardy as Eames, a sharp-tongued associate of Cobb's. He is referred to as a fence but his speciality is forgery, more accurately identity theft. Eames uses his ability to impersonate others inside the dream world in order to manipulate Fischer. Hardy described his character as "an old, Graham Greene-type diplomat; sort of faded, shabby, grandeur  the old Shakespeare lovey mixed with somebody from Her Majesty's Special Forces", who wears "campy, old money" costumes.[20]Ellen Page as Ariadne, a graduate student of architecture who is recruited to construct the various dreamscapes, which are described as mazes. The name Ariadne alludes to a princess of Greek myth, daughter of King Minos, who aided the hero Theseus by giving him a sword and a ball of string to help him navigate the labyrinth which was the prison of the Minotaur. Nolan said that Page was chosen for being a "perfect combination of freshness and savvy and maturity beyond her years".[21] Page said her character acts as a proxy to the audience, as "she's just learning about these ideas and, in essence, assists the audience in learning about dream sharing".[22] Evan Rachel Wood was Christopher Nolan's first choice to play Ariadne, but she turned it down. Before Ellen Page was offered and accepted the role, Nolan considered casting Emily Blunt, Rachel McAdams, Emma Roberts, Jessy Schram, and Carey Mulligan.Marion Cotillard as Mallorie "Mal" Cobb, Dom's deceased wife. She is a manifestation of Dom's guilt about the real Mal's suicide. He is unable to control these projections of her, challenging his abilities as an extractor.[16] Nolan described Mal as "the essence of the femme fatale," and DiCaprio praised Cotillard's performance saying that "she can be strong and vulnerable and hopeful and heartbreaking all in the same moment, which was perfect for all the contradictions of her character".[23]Ken Watanabe as Mr. Saito, a Japanese businessman who employs Cobb for the team's mission. Nolan wrote the role with Watanabe in mind, as he wanted to work with him again after Batman Begins.[18] Inception is Watanabe's first work in a contemporary setting where his primary language is English. Watanabe tried to emphasize a different characteristic of Saito in every dream level  "First chapter in my castle, I pick up some hidden feelings of the cycle. It's magical, powerful and then the first dream. And back to the second chapter, in the old hotel, I pick up [being] sharp and more calm and smart and it's a little bit [of a] different process to make up the character of any movie".[24]Joseph Gordon-Levitt as Arthur, Cobb's partner who manages and researches the missions. Gordon-Levitt compared Arthur to the producer of Cobb's art, "the one saying, 'Okay, you have your vision; now I'm going to figure out how to make all the nuts and bolts work so you can do your thing'".[25] The actor did all of his stunts but one scene and said the preparation "was a challenge and it would have to be for it to look real".[26] James Franco was in talks with Christopher Nolan to play Arthur, but was ultimately unavailable due to scheduling conflicts.Dileep Rao as Yusuf, the team's chemist. Rao describes Yusuf as "an avant-garde pharmacologist, who is a resource for people, like Cobb, who want to do this work unsupervised, unregistered and unapproved of by anyone". Co-producer Jordan Goldberg said the role of the chemist was "particularly tough because you don't want him to seem like some kind of drug dealer", and that Rao was cast for being "funny, interesting and obviously smart".[27]Tom Berenger as Peter Browning, Robert Fischer's godfather and fellow executive at the Fischers' company.[1] Berenger said Browning acts as a "surrogate father" to Robert, who calls the character "Uncle Peter", and emphasized that "Browning has been with [Robert] his whole life and has probably spent more quality time with him than his own father".[27]Pete Postlethwaite as Maurice, the dying founder of a business empire. The film became one of Postlethwaite's final film roles before his death in early 2011.Michael Caine as Prof. Stephen Miles, Cobb's mentor and father-in-law,[27] and Ariadne's college professor who recommends her to the team.[28]Lukas Haas as Nash, an architect in Cobb's employment who betrays the team and is later replaced by Ariadne.[29]Talulah Riley as a woman whom Eames disguises himself as in a dream. Riley liked the role, despite it being minimal  "I get to wear a nice dress, pick up men in bars, and shove them in elevators. It was good to do something adultish. Usually I play 15-year-old English schoolgirls."[30]Miranda Nolan plays a minor role as an air hostess. Miranda is a first cousin to the film's director Christopher Nolan.[31]Lucid DreamingSuggestionJohnson, David Kyle (Editor); Irwin, William (Series Editor) (2011), Inception and Philosophy: Because It's Never Just a Dream, John Wiley & Sons, ISBN1-118-07263-4Nolan, Christopher (Author); Nolan, Jonathan (Preface) (2010), Inception: The Shooting Script, Insight Editions, ISBN1-60887-015-4Crawford, Kevin Ray (Author) (2012), The Rhetorics of the Time-Image: Deleuzian Metadiscourse on the Role of Nooshock Temporality (viz. "Inception") in Christopher Nolan's Cinema of the Brain, ProQuest LLCOfficial websiteInception at the Internet Movie DatabaseInception at AllRoviGame of Thrones is an American medieval fantasy television series created for the U.S. channel HBO by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss. It is an adaptation of A Song of Ice and Fire, George R. R. Martin's series of fantasy novels, the first of which is titled A Game of Thrones. Filmed in a Belfast studio and on location elsewhere in Northern Ireland, Malta, Croatia, Iceland, and Morocco, it premiered on HBO in the United States on 17 April 2011.The series, set in the fictional continents of Westeros and Essos at the end of a decade-long summer, interweaves several plot lines. The first follows the members of several noble houses in a civil war for the Iron Throne of the Seven Kingdoms; the second covers the rising threat of the impending winter and the mythical creatures of the North; the third chronicles the attempts of the exiled last scion of the realm's deposed dynasty to reclaim the throne. Through its morally ambiguous characters, the series explores issues of social hierarchy, religion, civil war, sexuality, crime and punishment.Highly anticipated since its early stages of development, Game of Thrones has received universal acclaim by critics, although its use of nudity has been criticized. The series has won numerous awards and nominations  including two Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Drama Series, a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Television Series  Drama, a Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation in Long Form, and a Peabody Award. Among the ensemble cast, Peter Dinklage won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series and the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor  Series, Miniseries or Television Film for his role as Tyrion Lannister.Game of Thrones is the most recent big-budget work to have contributed to the popularity of the fantasy genre in mainstream media.The series roughly follows the multiple storylines of the A Song of Ice and Fire series.[4] George R. R. Martin said that the show's pilot script was very faithful to his work.[5] Set in the fictional Seven Kingdoms of Westeros, Game of Thrones chronicles the violent dynastic struggles among the realm's noble families for control of the Iron Throne. As the series opens, additional threats are beginning to rise in the icy North and in the eastern continent of Essos.[3]Like the novels it adapts, Game of Thrones has a sprawling ensemble cast, which George R.R. Martin estimated to be the largest on television.[6] During the production of the third season, 257 cast names were recorded.[7] The following overview reduces the list of characters in Game of Thrones to those played by the actors credited as part of the main cast.Sean Bean is Lord Eddard "Ned" Stark, head of the Stark family whose members are involved in most of the series's intertwined plot lines. He and his wife Catelyn (Michelle Fairley) have five children: the eldest, Robb (Richard Madden), the dainty Sansa (Sophie Turner), the tomboy Arya (Maisie Williams), the adventurous Bran (Isaac Hempstead-Wright) and the toddler Rickon (Art Parkinson). The family's outsiders are Ned's bastard son Jon Snow (Kit Harington), and Ned's hostage and ward Theon Greyjoy (Alfie Allen).Ned's old friend King Robert Baratheon (Mark Addy) shares a loveless marriage with Queen Cersei Lannister (Lena Headey). In defiance of her father, the fabulously wealthy Lord Tywin Lannister (Charles Dance), Cersei has taken her twin, the "Kingslayer" Ser Jaime Lannister (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau) as her secret lover. She loathes her younger brother, the clever dwarf Tyrion (Peter Dinklage), who is attended by his mistress Shae (Sibel Kekilli) and the sellsword Bronn (Jerome Flynn). Cersei's oldest child is Prince Joffrey Baratheon (Jack Gleeson), who is guarded by the scarfaced warrior Sandor "the Hound" Clegane (Rory McCann). The king's "Small Council" of advisors includes the crafty Lord Petyr "Littlefinger" Baelish (Aidan Gillen) and the eunuch spymaster Varys (Conleth Hill).After Robert Baratheon's death, Joffrey's throne is contested by Robert's two brothers. Stannis Baratheon (Stephen Dillane) is advised by the foreign priestess Melisandre (Carice van Houten) and the former smuggler Ser Davos Seaworth (Liam Cunningham), while Renly Baratheon (Gethin Anthony) is married to the ambitious noblewoman Margaery Tyrell (Natalie Dormer), but secretly loves her brother Ser Loras (Finn Jones).Across the Narrow Sea, siblings Viserys (Harry Lloyd) and Daenerys "Dany" Targaryen (Emilia Clarke)  the exiled children of the king overthrown by Robert Baratheon  are on the run for their lives, trying to win back the throne. Daenerys has been married to Khal Drogo (Jason Momoa), the leader of the barbaric Dothraki, and is guarded by the exiled knight Ser Jorah Mormont (Iain Glen). In the frigid North, Jon Snow faces the dangers beyond the Wall in the company of the men of the Night's Watch, which includes his friend Samwell Tarly (John Bradley) and Lord Commander Jeor Mormont (James Cosmo).The series began development in January 2007.[8] HBO, after acquiring the rights to the novels with the intent of turning them into an international cable television series, hired David Benioff and D. B. Weiss to write and executive produce the series, which would cover one novel's worth of material per season.[8] Initially, it was planned that Benioff and Weiss would write every episode save one per season, which author and co-executive producer George R. R. Martin was attached to write.[8][9] However, Jane Espenson and Bryan Cogman were later added to each write one episode of the first season.[3]"The Sopranos in Middle-earth" is the tagline Benioff jokingly suggested for the television adaptation, referring to its intrigue-filled content and dark tone combined with a fantasy setting.[10] In a 2012 study, the series was listed second out of 40 recent U.S. TV drama series by deaths per episode, with an average of 14.[11][12] Traditional high fantasy is described as generally incidental to the series, with HBO programming chief Michael Lombardo finding the storytelling appealing rather than the low-key magic or the exotic milieu, in spite of the network's new developmental policy to "[take] shots at shows that we wouldn't have taken a shot at five years ago".[13][14]The budget of Game of Thrones has been compared to that of the TV series Rome.[14] The pilot reportedly cost HBO between US$5 and 10 million,[13] and the total budget for the first season has been estimated at US$5060 million.[15] In the second season, the show obtained a 15% increase in budget in order to be able to stage the most important battle in the "clash of kings", the civil war that is the season's focus.[16]HBO hired expert language creator David J. Peterson from the Language Creation Society to develop the Dothraki language  "possessing its own unique sound, extensive vocabulary of more than 1,800 words and complex grammatical structure"  to be used in the series.[17] The first and second drafts of the pilot script, written by Benioff and Weiss, were submitted in August 2007[18] and June 2008,[19] respectively. While HBO found both drafts to their liking,[19][20] a pilot was not ordered until November 2008,[21][22] with the 20072008 Writers Guild of America strike possibly delaying the process.[20]The series adapts the novels as follows:The correspondence between the seasons and the novels they adapt is approximate rather than exact: Showrunners David Benioff and D.B. Weiss have said that they think of Game of Thrones as an adaptation of the novel series as a whole, rather than of individual books, which gives them the liberty to move scenes back and forth across books according to the requirements of the screen adaptation.[26] For instance, the final episode of Season 1 includes a few moments from the second book, and the latter half of Season 2 introduces elements from the beginning of the third book.Principal photography for the first season was scheduled to begin on July 26, 2010.[3] The primary location was the Paint Hall Studios in Belfast, Northern Ireland.[27] Exterior scenes in Northern Ireland were filmed at Sandy Brae in the Mourne Mountains (standing in for Vaes Dothrak), Castle Ward (Winterfell), Saintfield Estates (the Winterfell godswood), Tollymore Forest (outdoor scenes), Cairncastle (the execution site), the Magheramorne quarry (Castle Black) and at Shane's Castle (the tourney grounds).[28] Doune Castle in Stirling, Scotland, was also used in the original pilot episode for exterior and interior scenes at Winterfell.[29]The first season's Southern scenes were filmed in Malta, a change in location from the sets in Morocco used for the pilot episode.[3] The city of Mdina was used for scenes in King's Landing, and filming also took place at Fort Manoel (representing the Sept of Baelor), at the Azure Window on the island of Gozo (the Dothraki wedding site), and at San Anton Palace, Fort Ricasoli, Fort St Angelo and St. Dominic monastery (all used for scenes in the Red Keep).[28]For the second season, shooting of the Southern scenes shifted from Malta to Croatia, where the city of Dubrovnik and its walls allowed exterior shots of a seaside walled medieval city. Dubrovnik and Fort Lovrijenac were used for scenes in King's Landing and the Red Keep, and the island of Lokrum, St. Dominic monastery and the Rector's Palace as well as the Dubac quarry for scenes in Qarth. Scenes set north of the Wall, in the Frostfangs and at the Fist of the First Men, were filmed in Iceland in November 2011, on the Svnafellsjkull glacier and near Smyrlabjrg and Vk on Hfabrekkuheii.[28]The third season returned to Morocco to film Daenerys's scenes in Essos. The production employed three units ("Dragon", "Wolf" and "Raven") filming in parallel, six directing teams, 257 cast members and 703 crew members.[7]The show's costumes are inspired by many cultures, such as Japanese and Persian. Dothraki outfits resemble that of the Bedouins (one was made out of fish skins to resemble dragon scales), and the Wildlings wear fur side in and skin side out like the Inuit.[30] Wildling bone armor is made of molds taken of real bones and assembled with string and latex resembling catgut.[31] While extras who portray Wildlings and the Night's Watch wear hats as would be normal in a cold climate, main actors usually do not so viewers can identify the characters. Bjrk's Alexander McQueen high-neckline dresses inspired Dormer's unusual funnel-neck outfit, and prostitute costumes are designed to be quickly removed.[30] All clothing, whether for Wildlings or for women at the royal court, is aged for two weeks to improve realism on high-definition television.[31]About two dozen wigs are used for actors such as Headey, Dormer, Van Houten, and Clarke. Made of human hair and up to two feet in length, they cost up to $7,000 each and are washed and styled like real hair. Applying the wigs is a lengthy process; Clarke, for example, requires about two hours to style her brunette hair with a platinum-blonde wig and braids. Other actors such as Gleeson and Turner receive frequent haircoloring. For characters such as Clarke and her Dothrakis, hair, wigs, and costumes are processed so they appear as if they have not been washed in weeks.[30]The series receives funding from Northern Ireland Screen, a government agency financed by Invest NI and the European Regional Development Fund.[32] The first two seasons received UK6.5 million from Invest NI and, according to government estimates, caused 43 million to be spent in the regional economy.Invest NI also expects the series to generate tourism revenue. According to a government minister, the series has given Northern Ireland the most worldwide publicity in its history outside politics and the Troubles.[33] Northern Ireland Screen is preparing a bus tour of the series's filming locations for 2013.[34]The first season of Game of Thrones premiered on HBO in the United States on April 17, 2011,[35] and the second season on April 1, 2012. On the same day or in the subsequent weeks or months, the show also began airing in several other countries. The series is available only through HBO or its affiliates, not through third-party video on demand services, and in many countries not at all. This has contributed to the series being widely pirated.[36]Broadcasters carrying Game of Thrones include:[37]The ten episodes of the first season of Game of Thrones were published as a DVD and Blu-ray box set on March 6, 2012. The set includes extra background and behind-the-scenes material, but no deleted scenes, because almost all footage shot for the first season was used in the show.[38]The box set sold 350,000 units in the first seven days of its release, the largest first-week DVD sales ever for an HBO series. The series also set an HBO series record for digital download sales.[39] A "collectors edition" of the box set combining the DVD and Blu-ray versions, a dragon's egg paperweight and the first episode of season two was released in November 2012.DVD/Blu-ray box sets and digital downloads of the second season are to be made available by 19 February 2013.[40]The music for the series is composed by Ramin Djawadi. The first season's soundtrack, written in about ten weeks before the show's premiere,[41] was published by Varse Sarabande in June 2011.[42] The second season's soundtrack album was published in June 2012.[43]Thronecast: The Official Guide to Game of Thrones, a series of podcasts presented by Geoff Lloyd and produced by Koink, was available on the Sky Atlantic website and the UK iTunes store.[44] It featured episode analysis and cast interviews.[44]A companion book, Inside HBO's Game of Thrones by series writer Bryan Cogman (ISBN 978-1452110103), was published on September 27, 2012. On 192 pages, illustrated with concept art and behind-the-scenes photographs, the book covers the creation of the series's first two seasons, as well as its principal characters and families.[45]HBO has licensed Dark Horse Deluxe to produce a range of Game of Thrones-themed merchandise, such as statues and action figures. The goods were to be brought to the market by March 2012.[46] Funko produces a range of six Game of Thrones bobblehead dolls.[47]The series has also inspired other works.Anticipation for Game of Thrones was described by media as very high.[51][52] It was estimated to be the most pirated TV series of 2012, a reflection of its popularity as well as its limited availability.[53]Game of Thrones has been credited with an increased popularity of fantasy themes and mainstream acceptance of the fantasy fandom. "After this weekend", CNN.com wrote on the eve of the second season's premiere, "you may be hard pressed to find someone who isn't a fan of some form of epic fantasy". According to Ian Bogost, Game of Thrones continues a trend of successful screen adaptations, beginning with Peter Jackson's 2001 The Lord of the Rings film trilogy and continuing with the Harry Potter films, that have established fantasy as a lucrative mass market genre and serve as "gateway drugs to fantasy fan culture".[54]The series' popularity greatly boosted sales of the A Song of Ice and Fire novels, soon republished as tie-in editions, which remained at the top of bestseller lists for months on end. The Daily Beast wrote that Game of Thrones was a particular favorite of many sitcom writers, and consequently the series has been referenced in many other TV series.[55]Game of Thrones has also been the basis of additions to the popular vocabulary. The first season's frequent scenes in which characters explain their motives or background while having sex with prostitutes gave rise to the term "sexposition" to describe the practice of providing exposition against a backdrop of sex and nudity.[56] "Dothraki", the name of the nomadic horsemen appearing in the series, was listed fourth in a list of words from television most used on the Internet, compiled in September 2012 by Global Language Monitor.[57] After the second season, the media began using "Game of Thrones" as a figure of speech or as a comparison for situations of intense conflict and deceit, e.g., the court battles about U.S. healthcare legislation,[58] the Syrian civil war[59] or power struggles in the Chinese government.[60]The majority of reviews for the first season were very positive, with critics noting the high production values, the well-realized world, compelling characters, and giving particular note to the strength of the child actors.[61][62] As of March 7, 2012(2012 -03-07)[update], the first season of Game of Thrones has a Metacritic average of 79 out of 100 based on 28 critic reviews, categorized as "generally favorable".[63] The series was listed on many "best of 2011" lists published by U.S. media, including that of the Washington Post and TIME.[64][65][66] Variety wrote that "there may be no show more profitable to its network than 'Game of Thrones' is to HBO. Fully produced by the pay cabler and already a global phenomenon after only one season, the fantasy skein was a gamble that has paid off handsomely."[67]The second season was also very well received by critics. It obtained an average Metacritic score of 88 out of 100, which the website considers "universal acclaim".[68] Entertainment Weekly praised the "vivid, vital, and just plain fun" storytelling,[69] and The Hollywood Reporter wrote that the show made a "strong case for being one of TV's best series", its gravitas making it the only genre show dramatically comparable to shows such as Mad Men or Breaking Bad.[70] The New York Times published the only mixed review, disapproving of the characters' lack of complexity and their confusing multitude, as well as the meandering plot.[71]The amount of sex and nudity shown on Game of Thrones, especially in scenes that are incidental to the plot, has been the focus of much of the criticism aimed at the series. Charlie Anders wrote in io9 that while the first season was replete with light-hearted "sexposition", the second season appeared to focus on distasteful, exploitative and dehumanizing sex with little informational content.[72] According to the Washington Post's Anna Holmes, the nude scenes appeared to be aimed mainly at titillating heterosexual men, right down to the Brazilian waxes sported by the women in the series's faux-medieval setting, which made these scenes alienating to other viewers.[73] And in the Huffington Post, Maureen Ryan likewise noted that Game of Thrones mostly presented women naked, rather than men, and added that the excess of "random boobage" undercut any aspirations the series might have to address the oppression of women in a feudal society.[74] Saturday Night Live parodied this aspect of the adaptation in a sketch that portrayed the series as having a horny thirteen-year-old boy as a consultant whose main concern was showing as many breasts per scene as possible.[72][75]The novel series A Song of Ice and Fire and its TV adaptation Game of Thrones have a broad and active international fan base. In 2012, Vulture ranked the series's fandom as the most devoted in popular culture, ahead of that of Lady Gaga, Justin Bieber, Harry Potter or Star Wars. The publication attributed this to "the sheer surging might and immediacy of its readers (and viewers) obsessiveness over a story that is still in the midst of unfolding".[76] According to the marketing director of SBS, Game of Thrones has the highest fan engagement rate of any TV series known to her: 5.5% of the series's 2.9 million Facebook fans were talking online about the series in 2012, compared to 1.8% of the more than ten million fans of HBO's other fantasy series True Blood.[77]Among the many fan sites dedicated to the TV and novel series, Vulture noted in particular Westeros.org and WinterIsComing.net, which provide news reports and discussion forums, ToweroftheHand.com, which organizes communal readings of the novels, and Podcastoficeandfire.com, which produces a fan podcast.[76]By the end of May 2012, after the penultimate episode of the second season, Game of Thrones had accumulated an average of 10.3 million viewers per episode, including all repeats and on-demand viewings. This made it the third most-watched series in the history of HBO.[78] According to the tracking site TorrentFreak, the show averaged 3.9 million downloads per episode through public BitTorrent trackers for the 2012 season.[79]The following graphic shows viewer numbers for the first airings:The first season of Game of Thrones was nominated for thirteen of the 2011 Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Drama Series. It won two, Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Main Title Design. Peter Dinklage, who plays Tyrion Lannister, was named best supporting actor by the Emmys, the Golden Globes, the Scream Awards and the Satellite Awards. In 2012, the second season won six of the Creative Arts Emmy Awards.Game of Thrones at TV.comsee List of Game of Thrones characters1 Plot2 Cast and characters3 Production

3.1 Conception and development
3.2 Adaptation schedule
3.3 Filming
3.4 Costuming
3.5 Effect in Northern Ireland

3.1 Conception and development3.2 Adaptation schedule3.3 Filming3.4 Costuming3.5 Effect in Northern Ireland4 Broadcast5 Other media and products

5.1 DVD, Blu-ray and download releases
5.2 Soundtrack
5.3 Accompanying material
5.4 Merchandise
5.5 Other works based on the series

5.1 DVD, Blu-ray and download releases5.2 Soundtrack5.3 Accompanying material5.4 Merchandise5.5 Other works based on the series6 Reception

6.1 Cultural influence
6.2 Critical response
6.3 Fandom
6.4 Ratings
6.5 Awards

6.1 Cultural influence6.2 Critical response6.3 Fandom6.4 Ratings6.5 Awards7 References8 External links3.1 Conception and development3.2 Adaptation schedule3.3 Filming3.4 Costuming3.5 Effect in Northern Ireland5.1 DVD, Blu-ray and download releases5.2 Soundtrack5.3 Accompanying material5.4 Merchandise5.5 Other works based on the series6.1 Cultural influence6.2 Critical response6.3 Fandom6.4 Ratings6.5 AwardsThree video games that are based on the TV series and the novels have been published or are in development as of 2012.The fall 2012 ready-to-wear collection by the fashion brand Helmut Lang was inspired by Game of Thrones.[48][49]In March 2012, Wiley-Blackwell published Game of Thrones and Philosophy: Logic Cuts Deeper than the Sword (ISBN 978-1118161999). This entry in Blackwell's Pop Culture and Philosophy series, edited by Henry Jacoby and William Irwin, aims to highlight and discuss philosophical issues raised by the show and its source material.[50]Season 1 (2011): Viewers of the first airing on HBO in the U.S. on Sundays 9:00pm.Season 2 (2012): Viewers of the first airing on HBO in the U.S. on Sundays 9:00pm.Official Game of Thrones website in the United States and in the United KingdomGame of Thrones at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe template Tv.com is being considered for deletion.Fan sites mentioned in the article:Westeros  news and discussionWinter is Coming  news and discussionTower of the Hand  readingsPodcast of Ice and Fire  fan podcastThe Legend of Korra is an American animated television series that premiered on the Nickelodeon television network on April 14, 2012.[2] It was created by Michael Dante DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko as a sequel to their previous show, Avatar: The Last Airbender, which aired on the same network from 2005 to 2008. Like its predecessor, the series is set in a fictional world where some people are able to "bend"manipulate the elements of water, earth, fire, or air. Only one person, the "Avatar," can manipulate all four elements, and he or she is responsible for maintaining the balance in the world. The series follows Korra, the current incarnation of the Avatar, as she travels to the metropolis of Republic City to learn airbending and face an anti-bender revolutionary group called the "Equalists."[3][4]The series, whose style is strongly influenced by Japanese animation,[5] was announced at San Diego Comic-Con in 2010 as Avatar: Legend of Korra.[6] It was initially conceived as a miniseries of 12 episodes,[7] but is now set to run for 52 episodes separated into two seasons.[8] The creators separated each season into two "books," each of which tells a separate story. Several producers and voice actors from the previous series, including designer Joaquim Dos Santos and composer Jeremy Zuckerman, returned to work on The Legend of Korra.[9]The Legend of Korra was initially conceived as a 12-episode miniseries. Nickelodeon later expanded it to a full 26-episode season, and in July 2012 again to two 26-episode seasons. While Nickelodeon divides the series in two seasons for administrative purposes, the creators conceive of it as consisting of four separate "books" composed of 12 to 14 episodes ("chapters"), with each book telling a stand-alone story. The Legend of Korra is intended to conclude with the fourth book.[10]The Legend of Korra is set in the fictional world of Avatar: The Last Airbender. The world is separated into four nations: the (Northern and Southern) Water Tribes, the Air Nomads, the Earth Kingdom and the Fire Nation. The focus of the series is "bending," the ability of some humans (and animals) to telekinetically manipulate the element associated with their nation (water, earth, fire or air). Bending is carried out using spiritual and physical exercises, which are portrayed in the series as similar to Chinese and other Asian martial arts.Only one person, the "Avatar," can bend all four elements. Cyclically reincarnating among the world's four nations, the Avatar is responsible for maintaining balance in the world. Like its predecessor, The Legend of Korra focuses on the current incarnation of the Avatar: Korra, a 17-year-old girl from the Southern Water Tribe. At the start of the series, she has mastered waterbending, earthbending, and firebending, but must complete her training by learning airbending from Tenzin, the youngest child of Aang and Katara from the original series.[3]The series is mostly set in Republic City, the capital of the United Republic of Nations, a state that emerged after the end of the war that occurred in Avatar: The Last Airbender. Its capital, Republic City, a metropolis described as "what if Manhattan had happened in Asia" by the series' creators,[11] has become a melting pot for people of all nations. The residents are united by their passion for "pro-bending," a spectator sport in which two teams composed of one earthbender, waterbender, and firebender try to throw each other out of a ring using bending.The series opens with a montage introducing Korra as the Avatar and showing that she has mastered every element except airbending. It is then revealed that due to problems in Republic City, Tenzin will not be able to move to the Southern Water Tribe and teach Korra airbending. As a result, Korra sneaks out and runs away to Republic City so that Tenzin can train her there. Once there, Korra clashes with police chief Lin Beifong (the daughter of Toph from Avatar: The Last Airbender) after dispensing vigilante justice to the local triads. Shortly thereafter, the two main antagonists of the season are introduced: the Equalists, an underground activist movement; and Tarrlok, an ambitious politician. The Equalists are non-benders led by a mysterious masked man, Amon. Their goal is to bring about "equality" between benders and non-benders. Councilman Tarrlok believes in aggressive tactics for bringing the Equalists to justice, despite protests from his pacifist colleague Tenzin, Korra's airbending trainer. As Korra explores Republic City, she meets the brothers Mako and Bolin and joins their pro-bending team, the "Fire Ferrets." They are successful in the league, but romantic tensions among them and Asami, Mako's girlfriend, put a strain on their relationship.As the story progresses, Korra discovers that Amon has the power to remove a person's bending ability. Tarrlok cajoles Korra to join his anti-Equalist "task force," and the Equalists begin using terrorist tactics, climaxing in an attack on the pro-bending arena, where Amon strips the winning team of their bending. But when Tarrlok continues indiscriminately repressing non-benders, Korra refuses to continue supporting him. After Tarrlok imprisons her friends to blackmail her, they fight. Tarrlok overpowers Korra with bloodbending, an illegal form of waterbending, and kidnaps her, framing the Equalists. Tenzin, Lin, and Korra's friends eventually discover that Tarrlok is lying, but as they do Amon arrives at Tarrlok's hideout and removes Tarrlok's bending. Korra escapes, only to find Republic City facing an Equalist military coup.In the two-part finale of Book One: Air, naval reinforcements from the United Forces, led by Zuko's grandson Iroh, are defeated by Equalist sea mines and biplanes. Attempting to find Amon, Korra learns that Tarrlok and Amon are both sons of the bloodbender Yakone, who was defeated 42 years ago by Avatar Aang, as well as water- and bloodbenders. In a showdown with Amon at one of his rallies, Amon is able to strip Korra of her power to bend all elements but in desperation she unlocks her airbending. After Mako and Korra manage to overpower and publicly unmask Amon as a waterbender, Amon flees with Tarrlok, who later detonates their boat on the open sea. The despondent Korra finally manages to establish spiritual contact with her predecessor, Aang, who restores her bending powers, allowing her to do the same for Amon's other victims.The Legend of Korra was co-created and produced by Michael Dante DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko at Nickelodeon Animation Studios in Burbank, California. Animation work was mostly done by South Korean animation studio Studio Mir. Production of the series was announced at the annual Comic-Con in San Diego on July 22, 2010. It was originally due for release in October 2011.[6][12] Tentatively titled Avatar: Legend of Korra at the time, it was intended to be a twelve-episode[7] mini series set in the same fictional universe as the original show,[12] but seventy years later.[13] The show's premiere was delayed to April 14, 2012, to permit the addition of 14 episodes.[12] At the San Diego Comic-Con 2011, the creators confirmed that the first twelve episodes would constitute the first book and the other fourteen a second book. Also it was revealed that the title would be changed to The Last Airbender: Legend of Korra. In March 2012, it was renamed again to its final title: The Legend of Korra.The show is darker-themed than the original show, but with a balance between mature themes and a sense of fun and adventure. It was announced early on that the show's creators write all of the episodes themselves and that filler episodes would be omitted, allowing for a more concise story.[14] However, when the series was expanded from its original 12-episode schedule to 26 (and eventually 52), more writers were brought in so that the creators could focus on design work.[15] Joaquim Dos Santos and Kihyun Ryu, who worked on the animation and design of the original series, are also involved in this show, as is storyboarder Ian Graham. Jeremy Zuckerman, who composed the soundtrack for the original series as part of "The Track Team," also returned to score The Legend of Korra.[16]The Legend of Korra is produced mainly as traditional animation, with most frames drawn on paper in Korea by the animators at Studio Mir and scanned for digital processing. The series makes occasional use of computer-generated imagery for complex scenes, most noticeably in the animations of the pro-bending arena or the Satomobile factory.While The Legend of Korra is produced in the U.S. and therefore not a work of Japanese animation ("anime") in the strict sense, The Escapist magazine argued that the series is so strongly influenced by anime that it would otherwise easily be classified as such: Its protagonists (a superpowered heroine, her group of talented, supporting friends, a near-impervious villain who wants to reshape the world), its themes (family, friendship, fear, and death) and the quality of its voice acting as well as the style of its visuals are very similar to those of leading anime series such as Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood, Bleach or Trigun.[5] A notable difference to such series is the absence of lengthy opening and ending sequences set to J-pop songs:[5] to save broadcast time, The Legend of Korra's openings and endings last only a few seconds. The series mostly abstains from using the visual tropes characteristic of anime, but does rarely use exaggerated facial expressions to highlight emotions for comic effect.Like Avatar, The Legend of Korra is scored by The Track Team, the partnership of composers Jeremy Zuckerman and Benjamin Wynn. As with Avatar, no soundtrack album has been published or announced to date.Bryan Konietzko and Mike DiMartino's concept for the score was to blend traditional Chinese music with early jazz. On that basis, Zuckerman and Wynn composed a score combining elements of Dixieland, traditional Chinese music and Western orchestration, performed mainly by a string sextet and various Chinese solo instruments.[17]The first twelve episodes (Book 1: Air) of the first season aired in the U.S. on Nickelodeon between April 14, 2012 and June 23, 2012, and are available in the U.S. on the channel's website and through the Hulu Plus service. They are to be broadcast in other countries on the local Nickelodeon channels beginning in August 2012.In June 2012, Nickelodeon began producing the second part of the first season (Book 2: Spirits),[18][19] which is expected to air sometime in 2013.[19][20]In November 2012, the entertainment news website Hypable noted that a trailer for a The Legend of Korra DVD release had surfaced on the Internet. The trailer did not indicate when the DVD would become available.[21]Janet Varney was cast as Korra, the series' 17-year-old "headstrong and rebellious" protagonist,[1] and Aang's successor as the Avatar. Her character was inspired by Bryan Konietzko's "pretty tough" sister, and by female MMA fighters, notably Gina Carano.[19][22] The series focuses on Korra and her friends Mako, Bolin and Asami. Mako was named after Mako Iwamatsu, the voice actor for Iroh in the original series, who died during the production of Avatar: The Last Airbender's production. Mako is voiced by David Faustino and is described as "dark and brooding," having grown up on the streets.[1][23] His brother, Bolin, who is voiced by P. J. Byrne, has an opposite personality and is described as lighthearted, humorous, and "always having a lady on his arm."[1][24] Asami Sato, the only main character who is a non-bender, is voiced by Seychelle Gabriel. She is the only daughter of the wealthy industrialist Hiroshi Sato.[1] The other main characters are Korra's airbending teacher Tenzin, voiced by J. K. Simmons, and Republic City police chief Lin Beifong, voiced by Mindy Sterling. Additionally, Dee Bradley Baker, who voiced a number of animals in the original series, returned in The Legend of Korra to voice Naga and Pabu, Korra's and Bolin's animal friends. Pabu was inspired by Futa, a famous standing Japanese red panda.[25]Among the other recurring characters, the first to be introduced is Tenzin's wife Pema (Maria Bamford) and her children Jinora (Kiernan Shipka), Ikki (Darcy Rose Byrnes), Meelo (Logan Wells), and Rohan. Jinora and Ikki are both girls and airbenders. Jinora is calmer and an avid reader[26][27] and Ikki is described as "fun, crazy, and a fast talker."[27] Meelo (also an airbender) and Rohan (born during the finale of Book One: Air) are Pema's sons. Korra and her friends are supported by General Iroh, a firebender and General of the "United Forces." He is voiced by Dante Basco, the voice actor of Zuko in the original series, and is described as "a swashbuckling hero-type guy."[28][29][30] He is named after Iroh, Zuko's uncle in the original series.[18]Book One: Air features two main antagonists: Amon, the mysterious masked leader of the "Equalist" movement; and Tarrlok, a suave politician. Both are waterbenders, bloodbenders, and brothers who were raised in the Northern Water Tribe. Their father is Yakone, a criminal voiced by Clancy Brown who is seen in the series through Korra's visions of Republic City 42 years before the series' start. Amon, whose real name is Noatak, is voiced by Steve Blum. He is shown in the series to have the power to remove an individual's bending.[1][31] Tarrlok, who is also voiced by Dee Bradley Baker, is the Northern Water Tribe's representative on Republic City's governing council. He is an ambitious and charismatic politician who resorts to increasingly repressive methods to counter Amon and the Equalist movement.[32] Other recurring antagonists include the "Lieutenant" (Lance Henriksen), Amon's second-in-command, and Hiroshi Sato (Daniel Dae Kim), Asami's father who joins the Equalists because firebenders killed his wife. Sato is the self-made owner of Future Industries, a company that makes the series' version of the Model-T automobile: the "Satomobile." The character was inspired by Theodore Roosevelt and by the Japanese industrialists Keita Goto and Iwasaki Yatar.[33]David Hinckley of the New York Daily News wrote that the "visually striking" series is "full of little tricks and nuances that only true fans will notice and savor, but nothing prevents civilians from enjoying it as well."[34] Brian Lowry of Variety felt that the series "represents a bit more ambitious storytelling for older kids, and perhaps a few adults with the geek gene."[35] Prior to the first book's finale, Scott Thill of Wired hailed The Legend of Korra as "the smartest cartoon on TV," able to address adults' spiritual and sociopolitical concerns while presenting an "alternately riveting and hilarious ride packed with fantasy naturalism, steampunk grandeur, kinetic conflicts, sci-fi weaponry and self-aware comedy."[36] Thill proposed that the Equalists' cause reflected the recent issues in the Occupy movement, and DiMartino responded that though the series was written before Occupy Wall Street began, he agreed that the show similarly depicted "a large group of people who felt powerless up against a relatively small group of people in power."[37] Alyssa Rosenberg praised the show for examining issues of class in an urban setting, and a guest post in her column later argued that the struggle between Korra and Amon's Equalists reflected some of the ideas of John Rawls' "luck egalitarianism," praising the show for tackling moral issues of inequality and redistribution.[38][39]Elements of the first book that received particular praise were the exceptional quality of the animation, the background paintings[40] and the martial-arts action scenes,[41] as well as the series' innovative and engrossing visual design and style.[40] The writers were credited for finding a believable balance between magic and technology[42] and for their mature and nuanced portrayal of romantic relationships and conflicts.[43][41] Critics also praised the writers' willingness and ability to tackle difficult themes such as social unrest,[44] terrorism, Tarrlok's murdersuicide of Amon,[45] as well as (depending on the interpretation of a scene from the season finale) Korra considering suicide after losing her bending.[46][47][48]The first book overall, in particular the finale, received high praise by critics, but did get a few criticisms. Kotaku editor Kirk Hamilton, in a piece discussing his perceived flaws of the first season, wrote that he felt the series failed to tackle its central conflicts in a meaningful way, the mix of comedy and drama, the greater amount of character arcs in a shorter series, and the neat ending.[49] Raz Greenberg of Strange Horizons commented that Korra seemed as though she had things too easy in life in comparison to Aang, and also criticized the show's rapid pacing. [50] Max Nicholson of IGN largely praised the series' writing, animation, humor, setting, and characters, and even addressed criticisms of the ending by pointing out that several things accused of being a deus ex machina had been foreshadowed throughout the series. However, he did feel that the love triangle arc between Mako, Asami, and Korra fell flat and that the pro-bending arc felt superfluous while praising the way it led into the greater war arc with Amon. He also felt that Mako, despite being a major character, felt underwritten. Lauren Davis of io9 was extremely positive about the arc of the characters and the setting, though also felt disappointed about the show's pacing.[42]Book One: Air drew an average of 4.3 million viewers per episode. This was the highest audience total for an animated show in the U.S. in 2012.[51]Book One: Air is to be adapted as two novels by Erica David, aimed at readers aged twelve and up. The novelizations are to be published by Random House in 2013:[52]In August 2012, Variety reported that Paramount Animation, a sister company of Nickelodeon, was starting development of several animated movies, with budgets of around US$100 million. According to Variety, a possible candidate for one of the films is The Legend of Korra.[53] Series creator Bryan Konietzko wrote on his blog that while he and Michael Dante DiMartino "would love to write/direct an animated Korra feature film sometime," no such movie was in development.[54]Action/AdventureFantasy/SteampunkComedy-dramaMichael Dante DiMartinoBryan KonietzkoMichael Dante DiMartinoBryan KonietzkoJoaquim Dos SantosKi Hyun RyuJanet VarneyJ. K. SimmonsDavid FaustinoP. J. ByrneMindy SterlingSeychelle GabrielSteven BlumDee Bradley BakerJeff BennettJeremy ZuckermanBenjamin WynnMichael Dante DiMartinoBryan KonietzkoJoaquim Dos SantosNickelodeon Animation StudiosStudio Mir (animation)NTSC 16:9 (480i)NTSC 16:9 (1080i)1 Series overview2 Story

2.1 Setting
2.2 Plot

2.1 Setting2.2 Plot3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Style
3.3 Music

3.1 Development3.2 Style3.3 Music4 Broadcast

4.1 DVD release

4.1 DVD release5 Cast and characters6 Reception

6.1 Reviews
6.2 Ratings

6.1 Reviews6.2 Ratings7 Adaptations

7.1 Novels
7.2 Film

7.1 Novels7.2 Film8 References9 External links2.1 Setting2.2 Plot3.1 Development3.2 Style3.3 Music4.1 DVD release6.1 Reviews6.2 Ratings7.1 Novels7.2 FilmRevolution (ISBN 978-0449815540), adapting episodes one to six, to be published on 8 January 2013Endgame (ISBN 978-0449817346), adapting episodes seven to twelve, to be published on 23 July 2013Official websiteThe Legend of Korra at the Internet Movie DatabaseStudio Mir (Animation Production Studio)Avatar Wiki,  an external wiki

The Legend of Korra

The Legend of KorraThe Legend of KorraAngry Birds is a video game franchise created by Finnish computer game developer Rovio Entertainment. Inspired primarily by a sketch of stylized wingless birds, the first game was first released for Apple's iOS in December 2009.[1] Since that time, over 12 million copies of the game have been purchased from Apple's App Store,[2] which has prompted the company to design versions for other touchscreen-based smartphones, such as those using the Android operating system, among others.Angry Birds has been praised for its successful combination of addictive gameplay, comical style, and low price. Its popularity led to versions of Angry Birds being created for personal computers and gaming consoles, a market for merchandise featuring its characters and even long-term plans for a feature film or television series. With a combined 1 billion downloads across all platforms and including both regular and special editions,[3] the game has been called "one of the most mainstream games out right now",[4] "one of the great runaway hits of 2010",[5] and "the largest mobile app success the world has seen so far".[6]The initial version of the game was released on iOS in December 2009. In the game, players use a slingshot to launch birds at pigs stationed on or within various structures, with the intent of destroying all the pigs on the playing field. As players advance through the game, new types of birds become available, some with special abilities that can be activated by the player. Rovio Mobile has supported Angry Birds with numerous free updates that add additional game content, and the company has also released stand-alone holiday and promotional versions of the game. There have been free upgrades released by Rovio:[7]This game contains several holiday-themed episodes:Angry Birds Rio was launched in March 2011.[8] The game is based on the 20th Century Fox animated film Rio[8] There are several episodes included:A new game in the Angry Birds franchise called Angry Birds Space was launched on March 22, 2012,[9] The game features elements from the preceding Angry Birds games as well as new gameplay mechanics.[9] The stage is no longer flat, instead comprising several different planets, each of which has its own gravitational field that affects the trajectory of the birds after launch.[10] The episodes included are:Angry Birds Star Wars was announced in October 8, 2012, and was released on November 8, 2012. Merchandise related to the game was released on October 17th, and October 28th. The game is a crossover with the Star Wars original trilogy, and casts the Angry Birds as the Rebels and the Bad Piggies as the Empire. The chapters included are:A spin-off to Angry Birds, called Bad Piggies, was released on September 27, 2012 on Mac, Android and iOS platforms. The game is from the Pig's point of view, and involves building vehicles in order to reach a goal point.The Angry Birds characters have been referenced in television programs throughout the world. The Israeli comedy show Eretz Nehederet (in English: a Wonderful Country), one of the nation's most popular TV programs, satirized recent failed Israeli-Palestinian peace attempts by featuring the Angry Birds in peace negotiations with the pigs. Clips of the segment went viral, getting viewers from all around the world. The sketch received favorable coverage from a variety of independent blogs such as digitaltrends.com,[4] hotair.com[11] and intomobile.com,[12] as well as from online news media agencies such as Haaretz,[13] The Christian Science Monitor,[5] The Guardian,[14] and MSNBC.[15] American television hosts Conan O'Brien, Jon Stewart and Daniel Tosh have referenced the game in comedy sketches on their respective series, Conan, The Daily Show, and Tosh.0.[16][17][18] In the 30 Rock episode "Plan B", guest star Aaron Sorkin laments to Liz Lemon, "Our craft is dying while people are playing Angry Birds and poking each other on Facebook". He then provides a tip for Liz to improve her score in the game. In February 2011, American journalist Jake Tapper mockingly introduced U.S. Senator Chris Coons as the "Angry Birds champion of the Senate" during the National Press Club's annual dinner.[19] Some of the game's more notable fans include Prime Minister David Cameron of the United Kingdom, who plays the iPad version of the game, and author Salman Rushdie, who claims he is "something of a master at Angry Birds".[20] Basketball star Kevin Durant is an avid fan of Angry Birds, and regularly plays other NBA stars in matches, although he is weary of cheating.[21] In August 2011, the Milwaukee Brewers played the Angry Birds theme song during the pre-game introductions of the arch-rival St. Louis Cardinals players, in reference to former Cardinals' manager Tony LaRussa's propensity to bean opposing players.Angry Birds and its characters have been featured in advertisements for other products. In March 2011, the characters began appearing in a series of advertisements for Microsoft's Bing search engine.[22] At the 2011 South by Southwest festival in Austin, Texas, Nokia used scrims on a downtown building to project an advertisement for its new N8 handset that included the game's characters.[23] A June 2011 T-Mobile advertisement filmed in Barcelona, Spain included a real-life mock-up of the game in a city plaza,[24] while Nokia used the game in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia to promote an attempt to set a world record for the largest number of people playing a single mobile game.[25] Finnair has also used Angry Birds in their advertising, including taping an Airbus A340 airliner with the Angry Birds figures and holding an Angry Birds tournament on board a flight to Singapore.[26] Rovio has also prepared a number of web-based promotional variants of Angry Birds themed around creations of other companies, such as Finnish snack company Fazer,[27] Spanish pizza delivery chain Telepizza,[28] and Japanese television network Fuji TV,[29] as well as promotions of American brands including Cheetos,[30] Wonderful Pistachios[31] and Coca-Cola.[32]One of the 2012 New Models for Hot Wheels cars from Mattel is based on the Red Bird from Angry Birds. The package card bears both the Hot Wheels and Angry Birds logo.The game's characters have been used, officially or otherwise, in amusement park attractions. In September 2011, the Window of the World theme park in Changsha, China opened an unlicensed Angry Birds attraction.[33] Visitors to the park use a large slingshot to launch stuffed versions of the bird characters at green balloons representing the pigs.[33] Upon learning of the attraction, Rovio Mobile was reported to be considering working with the theme park to officially license it.[34] In March 2012, Rovio announced plans for an official Angry Birds land (opened April 28, 2012) at the Srknniemi adventure park in Finland.[35]Also in March 2012, Formula 1 driver Heikki Kovalainen unveiled an Angry Birds crash helmet that he will use in the 2012 season, following sponsorship from Rovio. Kimi Rikknen has also a Angry Birds Space logo on his cap. Angry Birds has teamed up with the Lotus F1 Team for the upcoming 2012 Monaco Grand Prix, with its logo on the top of each Lotus Renault F1 car's nosecone,[36] as well as a promotional web-based version of Angry Birds in honor of Kovalainen.[37]HockeyBird, an angry hockey playing bird, was the official mascot of the 2012 IIHF Ice Hockey World Championships. It was designed by Toni Kysenius and Rovio Entertainment.[38]The game's popularity has spawned knock-off and parody games that utilize the same basic mechanics as Angry Birds. For example, Angry Turds features monkeys hurling feces and other objects at hunters who have stolen their babies.[39] Another game, entitled Chicks'n'Vixens and released in beta form on Windows Phone devices, replaces the birds and pigs with chickens and foxes, respectively.[40] The developer of Chicks'n'Vixens intended the game as a challenge to Rovio Mobile, which stated at the time that a Windows Phone port of Angry Birds would not be ready until later in 2011.[40]Angry Birds has inspired works of religious analogy. A five-part essay entitled "Angry Birds Yoga  How to Eliminate the Green Pigs in Your Life" was written by Giridhari Dasa of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (i.e. Hare Krishna) of Brazil, utilizing the characters and gameplay mechanics to explain various concepts of yoga in Gaudiya Vaishnavism as understood and interpreted by the Hare Krishna.[41][42][43][44][45] The piece attracted much media attention, in Brazil and abroad, for its unique method of philosophico-religious presentation.[46][47][48][49] The piece was also recognized and appreciated by Rovio Mobile's Peter Vesterbacka, who was prompted to comment on Twitter, "Very cool! I can see Angry Birds Yoga becoming a worldwide craze;-)".[41]Rovio is investigating ways to expand the Angry Birds brand, including merchandise, television shows and movies.[50] The game's official website offers plush versions of the birds and pigs for sale, along with T-shirts featuring the game's logo and characters.[51] In May 2011, Mattel released an Angry Birds board game, entitled "Angry Birds: Knock on Wood".[52] Over 10 million Angry Birds toys have been sold thus far.[53] Rovio opened the first official Angry Birds retail store in Helsinki on November 11, 2011 at 11:11am local time.[34] It expects to open its next retail store somewhere in China, considered the game's fastest-growing market.[34]Mikael Hed, CEO of Rovio Mobile, has envisioned a feature film in the stop-motion animation style of Aardman Animation.[50] To that end, Rovio has purchased a Helsinki-based animation studio to prepare Angry Birds short cartoons on Nickelodeon,[53] the first of which was a Christmas special named "Wreck the Halls" that debuted in December 2011.[54] Rovio also hired David Maisel, former executive producer of Marvel Studios films such as Iron Man and Thor, to head up production of feature-length films.[53] Hed acknowledges that such a film would be years away, and that Rovio must keep the characters relevant until then, by producing sequels or new ports of the original game.[50] Rovio officials have hinted that one such "sequel" will be told from the pigs' point of view.[55]A TV series based on the game is expected to make its debut in the second quarter of 2012. Initially it will consist of 52 episodes, with a duration between two and a half and three minutes each.[56]On March 20, 2012, National Geographic published a paperback book titled Angry Birds Space: A Furious Flight Into The Final Frontier[57][58] shortly before the release of Angry Birds Space which became available on March 22, 2012.At Spring 2012, Olvi started to manufacture Angry Birds softdrink, when It made a deal with Rovio for making of them.[59] First there came two different tastes, Tropic (tropical fruits).[59] and Paradise (pineapple-mandarin)..[59] At September 2012 Olvi released two new tastes to the softdrink collection, they were Lagoon (pear-apple) and Space Comet (orange-cola).[60][61]Bad Piggies' Egg Recipes (2011)Angry Birds: The Big Green Doodle Book (2011)Angry Birds: The Big Red Doodle Book (2011)Angry Birds Space: Colors (2012)Angry Birds Space: Numbers (2012)Angry Birds Space: Sticker Book (2012)Angry Birds Space: Poster Book (2012)National Geographic Angry Birds Space: A Furious Flight Into the Final Frontier (2012)National Geographic Angry Birds: 50 True Stories of the Fed Up, Feathered, and Furious (2012)Angry BirdsAngry Birds SeasonsAngry Birds RioAngry Birds SpaceAngry Birds MagicAngry Birds Star Wars1 Game series

1.1 Angry Birds
1.2 Special editions

1.2.1 Angry Birds Seasons
1.2.2 Angry Birds Rio
1.2.3 Angry Birds Space
1.2.4 Angry Birds Star Wars



1.1 Angry Birds1.2 Special editions

1.2.1 Angry Birds Seasons
1.2.2 Angry Birds Rio
1.2.3 Angry Birds Space
1.2.4 Angry Birds Star Wars

1.2.1 Angry Birds Seasons1.2.2 Angry Birds Rio1.2.3 Angry Birds Space1.2.4 Angry Birds Star Wars2 Spin-Off3 Other media4 See also5 References6 External links1.1 Angry Birds1.2 Special editions

1.2.1 Angry Birds Seasons
1.2.2 Angry Birds Rio
1.2.3 Angry Birds Space
1.2.4 Angry Birds Star Wars

1.2.1 Angry Birds Seasons1.2.2 Angry Birds Rio1.2.3 Angry Birds Space1.2.4 Angry Birds Star Wars1.2.1 Angry Birds Seasons1.2.2 Angry Birds Rio1.2.3 Angry Birds Space1.2.4 Angry Birds Star Wars"Poached Eggs""Mighty Hoax""Danger Above""The Big Setup""Ham 'Em High""Mine and Dine""Birdday Party""Bad Piggies""Surf and Turf""Golden Eggs""Trick or Treat": Halloween-themed levels"Season's Greedings": Christmas-themed levels"Hogs and Kisses": Valentine's Day-themed levels"Go Green, Get Lucky": St. Patrick's Day-themed levels"Easter Eggs": Easter-themed levels"Summer Pignic": Summer-themed levels"Mooncake Festival": Chinese Mid-Autumn Festival-themed levels"Ham'o'ween": Halloween-themed levels"Wreck the Halls": Christmas-themed levels"Year of the Dragon": Chinese New Year-themed levels"Cherry Blossom": Japanese-themed levels"Piglantis": Summer-themed levels"Back to School": School-themed levels"Haunted Hogs": Halloween-themed levels"Winter Wonderham": Christmas-themed levels"Smuggler's Den""Jungle Escape""Beach Volley""Carnival Upheaval""Airfield Chase""Smuggler's Plane""Golden Beachball""Trophy Room""Pig Bang""Cold Cuts""Fry Me to the Moon""Utopia""Red Planet""Eggsteroids""Danger Zone""Tatooine""Death Star""Hoth (future update)""Path of the Jedi""Bonus"Boom BloxCrush the CastleCut the RopeMost popular Android apps by number of downloadsOfficial website