Citizen Kane is a 1941 American drama film, directed by and starring Orson Welles. It was Welles's first feature film. The film was nominated for Academy Awards in nine categories; it won an Academy Award for Best Writing (Original Screenplay) by Herman Mankiewicz and Welles. Citizen Kane was voted the greatest film of all time in five consecutive Sight & Sound's polls of critics,[3] until it was displaced by Vertigo in the 2012 poll.[4] Citizen Kane is particularly praised for its innovative cinematography, music, and narrative structure.The story is a film  clef that examines the life and legacy of Charles Foster Kane, played by Welles, a character based in part upon the American newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst,[5] Chicago tycoons Samuel Insull and Harold McCormick,[6] and aspects of Welles's own life.[7] Upon its release, Hearst prohibited mention of the film in any of his newspapers. Kane's career in the publishing world is born of idealistic social service, but gradually evolves into a ruthless pursuit of power. Narrated principally through flashbacks, the story is revealed through the research of a newsreel reporter seeking to solve the mystery of the newspaper magnate's dying word: "Rosebud".After his success in the theatre with his Mercury Players, and his controversial 1938 radio broadcast of The War of the Worlds on The Mercury Theatre on the Air, Welles was courted by Hollywood. He signed a contract with RKO Pictures in 1939. Unusual for an untried director, he was given the freedom to develop his own story and use his own cast and crew, and was given final cut privilege. Following two abortive attempts to get a project off the ground, he developed the screenplay of Citizen Kane with Herman Mankiewicz. Principal photography took place in 1940 and the film received its American release in 1941.While a critical success, Citizen Kane failed to recoup its costs at the box office. The film faded from view soon after its release but its reputation was restored, initially by French critics, especially Jean-Paul Sartre, and more widely after its American revival in 1956. It has topped many 'greatest film ever made' lists such as Sight & Sound's decennial poll, the AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list and its 10th Anniversary Update.The film was released on Blu-ray disc September 13, 2011, for a special 70th anniversary edition.[8]Charles Foster Kane (Orson Welles), an enormously wealthy media proprietor, has been living alone in Florida in his vast palatial estate Xanadu for the last years of his life, with a "No trespassing" sign on the gate. He dies in a bed while holding a snow globe and utters "Rosebud..."; the globe slips from his dying hand and smashes. Kane's death then becomes sensational news around the world. Newsreel reporter Jerry Thompson (William Alland) tries to find out about Kane's private life and, in particular, to discover the meaning behind his last word. The reporter interviews the great man's friends and associates, and Kane's story unfolds as a series of flashbacks. Thompson approaches Kane's second wife, Susan Alexander (Dorothy Comingore), now an alcoholic who runs her own club, but she refuses to tell him anything. Thompson then goes to the private archive of Walter Parks Thatcher (George Coulouris), a deceased banker who served as Kane's guardian during his childhood and adolescence. It is through Thatcher's written memoirs that Thompson learns about Kane's childhood. Thompson then interviews Kane's personal business manager Mr. Bernstein (Everett Sloane), best friend Jedediah Leland (Joseph Cotten), Susan for a second time, and Kane's butler Raymond (Paul Stewart) at Xanadu.Flashbacks reveal that Kane's childhood was spent in poverty in Colorado (his parents ran a boarding house), until the "world's third largest gold mine" was discovered on the seemingly worthless property his mother had acquired. He is forced to leave his mother (Agnes Moorehead) when she sends him away to the East Coast of the U.S. to live with Thatcher, to be educated. After gaining full control over his possessions at the age of 25, Kane enters the newspaper business with sensationalized yellow journalism. He takes control of the newspaper, the New York Inquirer, and hires all the best journalists. His attempted rise to power is documented, including his manipulation of public opinion for the Spanish American War; his first marriage to Emily Monroe Norton (Ruth Warrick), a President's niece; and his campaign for the office of governor of New York State, for which alternative newspaper headlines are created depending on the result.Kane's marriage disintegrates over the years, and he begins an affair with Susan Alexander. Both his wife and his opponent discover the affair, simultaneously ending his marriage and his political career. Kane marries his mistress, and forces her into an operatic career for which she has no talent or ambition. Kane finally allows her to abandon her singing career after she attempts suicide, but after a span of time spent in boredom and isolation in Xanadu, she ultimately leaves him.Kane spends his last years building his vast estate and lives alone, interacting only with his staff. The butler recounts that Kane had said "Rosebud" after Susan left him, right after seeing a snow globe.At Xanadu, Kane's vast number of belongings are being catalogued, ranging from priceless works of art to worthless furniture. During this time, Thompson finds that he is unable to solve the mystery and concludes that "Rosebud" will forever remain an enigma. He theorizes that "Mr. Kane was a man who got everything he wanted, and then lost it. Maybe Rosebud was something he couldn't get, or something he lost." In the ending of the film, it is revealed to the audience that Rosebud was the name of the sled from Kane's childhood an allusion to the only time in his life when he was truly happy. The sled, thought to be junk, is burned and destroyed in a basement furnace by Xanadu's departing staff.The film's closing credits read, "Most of the principal actors are new to motion pictures. The Mercury Theatre is proud to introduce them."[2] Welles along with his partner John Houseman had assembled them into a group known as the Mercury Players to perform his productions in the Mercury Theatre in 1937. After accepting his Hollywood contract in 1939, Welles worked between Los Angeles and New York where the Mercury Theatre continued their weekly radio broadcasts for The Campbell Playhouse.[12] Welles had wanted all the Mercury Players to debut in his first film, but the cancellation of The Heart of Darkness project in December 1939 created a financial crisis for the group and some of the actors worked elsewhere.[12] This caused friction between Welles and Houseman, and their partnership ended.[12]RKO executives were dismayed that so many of the major roles went to unknowns, but Welles's contract left them with no say in the matter. The film features debuts from William Alland, Agnes Moorehead, Everett Sloane, Ruth Warrick and Welles himself. An uncredited Alan Ladd appears as one of the newspaper reporters.Orson Welles's notoriety following The War of the Worlds broadcast earned him Hollywood's interest, and RKO studio head George J. Schaefer's unusual contract.[13] Welles made a deal with Schaefer on July 21, 1939, to produce, direct, write, and act in two feature films.[14]:1 The studio had to approve the story and the budget if it exceeded $500,000. Welles was allowed to develop the story without interference, cast his own actors and crew members, and have the privilege of final cut unheard of at the time for a first-time director.[14]:1 He had spent the first five months of his RKO contract trying to get several projects going with no success. The Hollywood Reporter said, "They are laying bets over on the RKO lot that the Orson Welles deal will end up without Orson ever doing a picture there."[14]:15 First, Welles tried to adapt Heart of Darkness, but there was concern over the idea of depicting it entirely with point of view shots. Welles considered adapting Cecil Day-Lewis' novel The Smiler With The Knife, but realized that to challenge himself with a new medium, he had to write an original story.[15]Screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz was recuperating from a car accident and in-between jobs. He had originally been hired by Welles to work on The Campbell Playhouse radio program and was available to work on the screenplay for Welles's film. The writer had only received two screenplay credits between 1935 and his work on Citizen Kane and needed the job.[14]:16 There is dispute amongst historians regarding whose idea it was to use William Randolph Hearst as the basis for Charles Foster Kane. Welles claimed it was his idea while film critic Pauline Kael (in her 1971 essay "Raising Kane"[16]) and Welles's former business partner John Houseman claim that it was Mankiewicz's idea.[14]:17 For some time, Mankiewicz had wanted to write a screenplay about a public figure perhaps a gangster whose story would be told by the people that knew him.[17]Mankiewicz had already written an unperformed play about John Dillinger entitled The Tree Will Grow. Welles liked the idea of multiple viewpoints but was not interested in playing Dillinger. Mankiewicz and Welles talked about picking someone else to use as a model. They hit on the idea of using Hearst as their central character.[17] Mankiewicz had frequented Hearst's parties until his alcoholism got him barred. The writer resented this and became obsessed with Hearst and Marion Davies.[17] Hearst had great influence and the power to retaliate within Hollywood so Welles had Mankiewicz work on the script outside of the city. Because of the writer's drinking problem, Houseman went along to provide assistance and make sure that he stayed focused.[14]:17 Welles also sought inspiration from Howard Hughes and Samuel Insull (who built an opera house for his wife). Although Mankiewicz and Houseman got on well with Welles, they incorporated some of his traits into Kane, such as his temper.[15]During production, Citizen Kane was referred to as RKO 281. Most of the filming took place between June 29, 1940 and October 23, 1940 in what is now Stage 19 on the Paramount lot in Hollywood. There was some location filming with Balboa Park in San Diego[18] and San Diego Zoo[citation needed]; and still photographs of Oheka Castle in Huntington, New York were used in the opening montage representing Kane's Xanadu estate.[19][20] Welles prevented studio executives of RKO from visiting the set. He understood their desire to control projects and he knew they were expecting him to do an exciting film that would correspond to his The War of the Worlds radio broadcast. Welles's RKO contract had given him complete control over the production of the film when he signed on with the studio, something that he never again was allowed to exercise when making motion pictures. According to an RKO cost sheet from May 1942, the film cost $839,727 compared to an estimated budget of $723,800.[2]Welles ran a closed set, limited access to dailies and managed the publicity of Kane to make sure that its influence from Hearst's life was a secret.[14]:111 Publicity materials stated the film's inspiration was Faust.[15] RKO hoped to release the film in mid-February 1941. Writers for national magazines had early deadlines and so a rough cut was previewed for a select few on January 3, 1941. Friday magazine ran an article drawing point-by-point comparisons between Kane and Hearst and documented how Welles had led on Louella Parsons, Hollywood correspondent for Hearst papers, and made a fool of her in public. Reportedly, she was furious and demanded an immediate preview of the film. James Stewart, who was present at the screening, said that she walked out of the film. Soon after, Parsons called George Schaefer and threatened RKO with a lawsuit if they released Kane.[14]:111 The next day, the front page headline in Daily Variety read, "HEARST BANS RKO FROM PAPERS."[21] In two weeks, the ban was lifted for everything except Kane.[14]:111The Hollywood Reporter ran a front-page story on January 13 that Hearst papers were about to run a series of editorials attacking Hollywood's practice of hiring refugees and immigrants for jobs that could be done by Americans. The goal was to put pressure on the other studios in order to force RKO to shelve Kane.[14]:111 Soon afterwards, Schaefer was approached by Nicholas Scheck, head of MGM's parent company, with an offer on the behalf of Louis B. Mayer and other Hollywood executives to reimburse RKO if it would destroy the film.[14]:111112 Once RKO's legal team reassured Schaefer, the studio announced on January 21 that Kane would be released as scheduled and with one of the largest promotional campaigns in the studio's history. Schaefer brought Welles to New York City for a private screening of the film with the New York corporate heads of the studios and their lawyers.[14]:112 There was no objection to its release provided that certain changes, including the removal or softening of specific references that might offend Hearst, were made.[14]:112113 Welles agreed, and editor Robert Wise (who later became a celebrated film director himself in the 1950s and 60s) was brought in to cut the running time from two hours, two minutes, and 40 seconds to one hour, 59 minutes, and 16 seconds. That cut satisfied the corporate lawyers.[14]:113Richard Carringer, author of The Making of Citizen Kane (1985), described the early stages of the screenplay:Welles's first step toward the realization of Citizen Kane was to seek the assistance of a screenwriting professional. Fortunately, help was near at hand.... When Welles moved to Hollywood, it happened that a veteran screenwriter, Herman Mankiewicz, was recuperating from an automobile accident and between jobs... Mankiewicz was an expatriate from Broadway who had been writing for films for almost fifteen years.[14]:16However, according to film author Harlan Lebo, he was also "one of Hollywood's most notorious personalities."[22]:12 Mankiewicz was the older brother of producer-director Joseph Mankiewicz and was a former writer for The New Yorker and the New York Times and had moved to Hollywood in 1926. By the time Welles contacted him he had "established himself as a brilliant wit, a writer of extraordinary talent, [and] a warm friend to many of the screen world's brightest artists... [he] produced dialogue of the highest caliber."[22]:12 Yet Mankiewicz's behavior, according to Welles's close friend and associate John Houseman, was also a "public and private scandal. A neurotic and homophobic drinker and compulsive gambler..." Houseman adds, however, "that he was also one of the most intelligent, informed, witty, humane and charming men I have ever known."[22]:12 Despite those apparent contradictions in his personality, Welles "recognized the writer's abilities and trusted him to produce", wrote Lebo.[22]Speaking with Peter Bogdanovich in February 1969, Orson Welles said, "Nobody was more miserable, more bitter, and funnier than Mank ... a perfect monument of self-destruction. But, you know, when the bitterness wasn't focused straight at you, he was the best company in the world." When Bogdanovich asked how important Mankiewicz was to the Citizen Kane script, Welles responded, "Mankiewicz's contribution? It was enormous."[23]:5253According to film historian Clinton Heylin, "the idea of Citizen Kane was the original conception of Orson Welles, who in early 1940 first discussed the idea with John Houseman, who then suggested that both he and Welles leave for Los Angeles and discuss the idea with scriptwriter Herman Mankiewicz. He adds that Mankiewicz "probably believed that Welles had little experience as an original scriptwriter...[and] may even have felt that John Citizen USA, Welles's working title, was a project he could make his own."[24]:43 Orson Welles said that his preparation before making Citizen Kane was to watch John Ford's Stagecoach forty times.[25]Still incapacitated with a broken leg, Mankiewicz was happy to work with Welles, and an "alliance" formed, noted Houseman. This combination of a "brash new director, a nervous studio, and an erratic genius" gave birth to Citizen Kane, in what Houseman called, "an absurd venture."[22]:14Houseman recalled that Mankiewicz, during his convalescence, had "revived a long-simmering idea of creating a film biography in which a man's life would be brought to the screen after his death through the memories and opinions of the people who knew him best." And Welles himself had ideas that meshed with that concept, as he described in a 1969 interview in the book, This is Orson Welles:I'd been nursing an old notion the idea of telling the same thing several times and showing exactly the same thing from wholly different points of view. Basically, the idea Rashomon used later on. Mank liked it, so we started searching for the man it was going to be about. Some big American figure couldn't be a politician, because you'd have to pinpoint him. Howard Hughes was the first idea. But we got pretty quickly to the press lords.[23]:53Welles then assigned Mankiewicz, writes Lebo, "to work on an original screenplay not an adaptation as his first two projects would have been." Welles next traveled to New York and desperately "pleaded and persuaded Houseman to return to Los Angeles to manage Mankiewicz and his writing schedule."[22]According to film critic and author Pauline Kael, Mankiewicz "was already caught up in the idea of a movie about Hearst" when he was still working at the New York Times, in 1925. She learned from his family's babysitter, Marion Fisher, that she once typed as "he dictated a screenplay, organized in flashbacks. She recalls that he had barely started on the dictation, which went on for several weeks, when she remarked that it seemed to be about William Randolph Hearst, and he said, 'You're a smart girl.'"[16]:35In Hollywood, Mankiewicz had frequented Hearst's parties until his alcoholism got him barred.[17] And Hearst was also a person known to Welles. "Once that was decided", wrote author Don Kilbourne, "Mankiewicz, Welles, and John Houseman, a cofounder of the Mercury Theatre, rented a place in the desert, and the task of creating Citizen Kane began."[26]:221 This "place in the desert" was on the historic Verde ranch on the Mojave River in Victorville. In later years, Houseman gave Mankiewicz "total" credit for "the creation of Citizen Kane's script" and credited Welles with "the visual presentation of the picture."[22]:32Mankiewicz was put under contract by Mercury Productions and was to receive no credit for his work as he was hired as a script doctor. According to his contract with RKO, Welles would be given sole screenplay credit, and had already written a rough script consisting of 300 pages of dialogue with occasional stage directions under the title of John Citizen, USA.[17]One of the long standing debates of Citizen Kane has been the proper accreditation of the authorship of the screenplay, which the credits attribute to both Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson Welles. Mankiewicz biographer Richard Meryman notes that the dispute had various causes, including the way the movie was promoted. For instance, when RKO opened the movie on Broadway on May 1, 1941, followed by showings at theaters in other large cities, the publicity programs that were printed included photographs of Welles as "the one-man band, directing, acting, and writing." In a letter to his father afterward, Mankiewicz wrote, "I'm particularly furious at the incredibly insolent description of how Orson wrote his masterpiece. The fact is that there isn't one single line in the picture that wasn't in writing writing from and by me before ever a camera turned."[27]:270 Film historian Otto Friedrich said it made Mankiewicz "unhappy to hear Welles quoted in Louella Parsons's column, before the question of screen credits was officially settled, as saying, 'So I wrote Citizen Kane.'"[28]Controversy over the authorship of the Citizen Kane screenplay was revived in 1971 by film critic Pauline Kael, whose essay, "Raising Kane," was printed in two installments in The New Yorker (February 20 and 27, 1971) and subsequently collected in The Citizen Kane Book (1971). According to Kael, Rita Alexander, Mankiewicz's personal secretary, stated that she "took the dictation from Mankiewicz from the first paragraph to the last... and later did the final rewriting and the cuts, and handled the script at the studio until after the film was shot. ...[and said] Welles didn't write (or dictate) one line of the shooting script of Citizen Kane. She added that "Welles himself came to dinner once or twice...[and] she didn't meet him until after Mankiewicz had finished dictating the long first draft."[16]:38 However Welles had his own secretary, Katherine Trosper, who typed up Welles's suggestions and corrections, which were incorporated into the final script; Kael did not interview Trosper before producing her article.[29]Nevertheless, Kael maintained that Mankiewicz went to the Writers Guild and declared that he was the original author. Welles later claimed that he planned on a joint credit all along, but Mankiewicz claimed that Welles offered him a bonus of ten thousand dollars if he would let Welles take full credit."[28] According to Pauline Kael, "he had ample proof of his authorship, and when he took his evidence to the Screen Writers Guild... Welles was forced to split the credit and take second place in the listing."[16]:38 Charles Lederer, a screenwriter and a source for Kael's article, insisted that the credit never came to the Screen Writers Guild for arbitration.[30]Kael argued that Mankiewicz was the true author of the screenplay and therefore responsible for much of what made the movie great. This angered many critics of the day, most notably critic-turned-filmmaker Peter Bogdanovich, a close friend of Welles who rebutted Kael's claims in an October 1972 article for Esquire titled "The Kane Mutiny." Other rebuttals included articles by Joseph McBride (Film Heritage, Fall 1971) and Jonathan Rosenbaum (Film Comment, Spring 1972 and Summer 1972), interviews with George Coulouris and Bernard Herrmann that appeared in Sight & Sound (Spring 1972), and remarks in Welles biographies by Barbara Leaming and Frank Brady. Rosenbaum also reviews the controversy in his editor's notes to This is Orson Welles (1992).[23]:494501"I happen to disagree with the premise of the whole book, because she tries to pretend that Welles is nothing and that a mediocre writer by the name of Mankiewicz was a hidden Voltaire," Bernard Herrmann said during a question-and-answer session following an October 1973 lecture at the George Eastman House Museum in Rochester, New York. "Im not saying that Mankiewicz made no contribution. The titles clearly credit him. Orson says that he did make a valuable contribution. But really, without Orson, all of Mankiewicz's other pictures were nothing, before and after. With Orson, however, something happened to this wonderful man, but he could not have created Citizen Kane."[31]Robert L. Carringer likewise rebutted Kael's conclusions in an article titled "The Scripts of Citizen Kane" for the Winter 1978 edition of Critical Enquiry. Carringer refers to early script drafts with Welles's incorporated handwritten contributions, and mentions the issues raised by Kael rested on the evidence of an early draft which was mostly written by Mankiewicz. However Carringer points out that subsequent drafts clarified Welles's contribution to the script:Fortunately enough evidence to settle the matter has survived. A virtually complete set of script records for Citizen Kane has been preserved in the archives of RKO General Pictures in Hollywood, and these provide almost a day-to-day record of the history of the scripting...The full evidence reveals that Welles's contribution to the Citizen Kane script was not only substantial but definitive.Carringer notes that Mankiewicz' principal contribution was on the first two drafts of the screenplay, which he characterizes as being more like "rough gatherings" than actual drafts. Houseman accompanied Mankiewicz so as to ensure that the latter's drinking problem did not affect the screenplay. The early drafts established "the plot logic and laid down the overall story contours, established the main characters, and provided numerous scenes and lines that would eventually appear in one form or another in the film."(The Scripts of Citizen Kane) However he also noted that Kane in the early draft remained a caricature of Hearst rather than the fully developed character of the final film. The main quality missing in the early drafts but present in the final film is "the stylistic wit and fluidity that is the most engaging trait of the film itself."(ibid)According to film critic David Thomson, however, "No one can now deny Herman Mankiewicz credit for the germ, shape, and pointed language of the screenplay, but no one who has seen the film as often as it deserves to be seen would dream that Welles is not its only begetter."[32] Carringer considered that at least three scenes were solely Welles's work and, after weighing both sides of the argument, including sworn testimony from Mercury assistant Richard Baer, concluded, "We will probably never know for sure, but in any case Welles had at last found a subject with the right combination of monumentality, timeliness, and audacity."[14]:11 Harlan Lebo agrees, and adds, "of far greater relevance is reaffirming the importance of the efforts that both men contributed to the creation of Hollywood's greatest motion picture."[22]:32Carringer notes that Citizen Kane was unusual in relation to his later films in that it was original material rather than adaptations of existing sources. He cites that Mankiewicz's main contribution was providing him with "what any good first writer ought to be able to provide in such a case: a solid, durable story structure on which to build." (ibid, '"The Scripts of Citizen Kane")For his part, Welles stated the process of collaborating with Mankiewicz on the Citizen Kane screenplay in a letter to The Times (London), November 17, 1971:The initial ideas for this film and its basic structure were the result of direct collaboration between us; after this we separated and there were two screenplays: one written by Mr. Mankiewicz, in Victorville, and the other, in Beverly Hills, by myself. ... The final version of the screenplay ... was drawn from both sources.[23]:500In his 1982 chronicle of the studio, The RKO Story, scholar Richard B. Jewell concluded the following:Besides producing, directing and playing the role of Kane, Welles deserved his co-authorship credit (with Herman J. Mankiewicz) on the screenplay. Film critic Pauline Kael argues otherwise in a 50,000 word essay on the subject, but her case against Welles is one-sided and unsupported by the facts.[33]Orson Welles never confirmed a principal source for the character of Charles Foster Kane. It is believed that Kane is a synthesis of different personalities, although the main inspiration was the life of media tycoon William Randolph Hearst.[5] The film is commonly regarded as a fictionalized, unrelentingly hostile parody of Hearst, in spite of Welles's statement that "Citizen Kane is the story of a wholly fictitious character."[16]:42 According to film historian Don Kilbourne, "much of the information for Citizen Kane came from already-published material about Hearst... [and] some of Kane's speeches are almost verbatim copies of Hearst's. When Welles denied that the film was about the still-influential publisher, he did not convince many people."[26]:222Hearst biographer David Nasaw finds the film's depiction of Hearst unfair:Welles' Kane is a cartoon-like caricature of a man who is hollowed out on the inside, forlorn, defeated, solitary because he cannot command the total obedience, loyalty, devotion, and love of those around him. Hearst, to the contrary, never regarded himself as a failure, never recognized defeat, never stopped loving Marion [Davies] or his wife. He did not, at the end of his life, run away from the world to entomb himself in a vast, gloomy art-choked hermitage. Orson Welles may have been a great filmmaker, but he was neither a biographer nor a historian.[35]:574Arguing for the release of Citizen Kane before the RKO board, Welles pointed out the irony that it was Hearst himself who had brought so much attention to the film being about him, and that it was his own columnist Louella Parsons who was doing the most to publicize Kane's identification with Hearst. Public denials aside, Welles held the view that Hearst was a public figure and that the facts of a public figure's life were available for writers to reshape and restructure into works of fiction. Welles's legal advisor Arnold Weissberger put the issue in the form of a rhetorical question: "Will a man be allowed in effect to copyright the story of his life?"[36]:210211One particular aspect of the character, Kane's profligate collecting of possessions, was directly taken from Hearst. "And it's very curious a man who spends his entire life paying cash for objects he never looked at," Welles said. "He just acquired things, most of which were never opened, remained in boxes. It's really a quite accurate picture of Hearst to that extent."[23]:50 But Welles himself insisted that there were marked differences between his fictional creation and Hearst. He acknowledged that aspects of Kane were drawn from the lives of two business tycoons familiar from Welles's youth in Chicago Samuel Insull and Harold Fowler McCormick.[6]A financier closely associated with Thomas Edison, Samuel Insull (18591938) was a man of humble origins who became the most powerful figure in the utilities field.[37] He was married to a Broadway ingenue nearly 20 years his junior, and built the Chicago Civic Opera House. In 1925, after a 26-year absence, Gladys Wallis Insull returned to the stage in a charity revival of The School for Scandal that ran two weeks in Chicago.[38] When the performance was repeated on Broadway in October 1925, Herman Mankiewicz then the third-string theatre critic for The New York Times was assigned to review the production. In an incident that became infamous, Mankiewicz returned to the press room drunk and wrote only the first sentence of a negative review before passing out on his typewriter. Mankiewicz resurrected the experience in writing the screenplay for Citizen Kane, incorporating it into the narrative of Jedediah Leland.[27]:7778In 1926 Insull took a six-year lease on Chicago's Studebaker Theatre and financed a repertory company in which his wife starred. Gladys Insull's nerves broke when her company failed to find success, and the lease expired at the same time Insull's $3 billion financial empire collapsed in the Depression.[39][40] Like that of Charles Foster Kane, the life of Samuel Insull ended in bankruptcy and disgrace.Like Kane, Harold McCormick was divorced by his aristocratic first wife, Edith Rockefeller, and lavishly promoted the opera career of his only modestly talented second wife, Ganna Walska.[23]:497According to composer David Raksin, Bernard Herrmann used to say that much of Kane's story was based on McCormick, but that there was also a good deal of Orson Welles himself in the flamboyant character.[7] Welles lost his mother when he was nine years old and his father when he was 15. After this, he became the ward of Chicago's Dr. Maurice Bernstein. Bernstein is the last name of the only major character in Citizen Kane who receives a generally positive portrayal. Although Dr. Bernstein was nothing like the character in the film, Welles said, the use of the name "Bernstein" was a family joke. "I used to call people 'Bernstein' on the radio, all the time, too just to make him laugh. ... Mank did all the best writing for Bernstein. I'd call that the most valuable thing he gave us."[23]:6566In Hollywood in 1940, Orson Welles invited longtime friend and Mercury Theatre colleague Joseph Cotten to be part of a small group reading the script aloud for the first time. They got together around the pool at the Beverly Hills home of Herman Mankiewicz, Cotten wrote:"I think I'll just listen," Welles said. "The title of this movie is Citizen Kane, and I play guess who." He turned to me. "Why don't you think of yourself as Jedediah Leland? His name, by the way, is a combination of Jed Harris and your agent, Leland Hayward." "There all resemblance ceases," Herman reassured me. These afternoon garden readings continued, and as the Mercury actors began arriving, the story started to breathe.[41]"I regard Leland with enormous affection," Orson Welles said to filmmaker Peter Bogdanovich.[23]:84 He told Bogdanovich that the character of Jed Leland was based on drama critic Ashton Stevens, George Stevens's uncle and a close boyhood friend of Welles:What I knew about Hearst came more from him than from my father though my father did know him well ... But Ashton had taught Hearst to play the banjo, which is how he first got to be a drama critic, and, you know, Ashton was really one of the great ones. The last of the dandies he worked for Hearst for some 50 years or so, and adored him. A gentleman ... very much like Jed.[23]:66Regarded as the dean of American drama critics, Ashton Stevens (18721951) began his journalism career in 1894 in San Francisco and started working for the Hearst newspapers three years later. In 1910 he moved to Chicago where he covered the theatre for 40 years and became a close friend of Orson Welles's guardian, Dr. Maurice Bernstein.[42]Screenwriter Herman Mankiewicz incorporated an incident from his own early career as a New York Times theatre critic into the narrative of Jed Leland. Mankiewicz was assigned to review the October 1925 opening of The School for Scandal[43] a production that marked the return of Gladys Wallis to the Broadway stage. A famous ingenue of the 1890s, Wallis had retired upon her marriage to Chicago utilities magnate Samuel Insull but was now, 26 years later, using her husband's fortune to form her own repertory company. After her opening-night performance in the role of Lady Teazle, drama critic Mankiewicz returned to the press room "full of fury and too many drinks," wrote biographer Richard Meryman:He was outraged by the spectacle of a 56-year-old millionairess playing a gleeful 18-year-old, the whole production bought for her like a trinket by a man Herman knew to be an unscrupulous manipulator. Herman began to write: "Miss Gladys Wallis, an aging, hopelessly incompetent amateur, opened last night in..." Then Herman passed out, slumped over the top of his typewriter.[27]:7778The unconscious Mankiewicz was discovered by his boss, George S. Kaufman, who composed a terse announcement that the Times review would appear the following day.[44]Mankiewicz resurrected the incident for Citizen Kane. After Kane's second wife makes her opera debut, critic Jed Leland returns to the press room drunk. He passes out over the top of his typewriter after writing the first sentence of his review: "Miss Susan Alexander, a pretty but hopelessly incompetent amateur..."The common assumption that the character of Susan Alexander was based on Marion Davies was a major reason William Randolph Hearst tried to destroy Citizen Kane.[45] In his foreword to Davies's autobiography, published posthumously in 1975, Orson Welles draws a sharp distinction between the real-life actress and his fictional creation:That Susan was Kane's wife and Marion was Hearst's mistress is a difference more important than might be guessed in today's changed climate of opinion. The wife was a puppet and a prisoner; the mistress was never less than a princess. Hearst built more than one castle, and Marion was the hostess in all of them: they were pleasure domes indeed, and the Beautiful People of the day fought for invitations. Xanadu was a lonely fortress, and Susan was quite right to escape from it. The mistress was never one of Hearst's possessions: he was always her suitor, and she was the precious treasure of his heart for more than 30 years, until his last breath of life. Theirs is truly a love story. Love is not the subject of Citizen Kane.[34]Welles cited Samuel Insull's building of the Chicago Opera House, and business tycoon Harold Fowler McCormick's lavish promotion of the opera career of his second wife, as direct influences on the screenplay.[46] McCormick divorced Edith Rockefeller and married aspiring opera singer Ganna Walska as her fourth husband. He spent thousands of dollars on voice lessons for her and even arranged for Walska to take the lead in a production of Zaza at the Chicago Opera in 1920. Contemporaries said Walska had a terrible voice; New York Times headlines of the day read, "Ganna Walska Fails as Butterfly: Voice Deserts Her Again When She Essays Role of Puccini's Heroine" (January 29, 1925), and "Mme. Walska Clings to Ambition to Sing" (July 14, 1927)."According to her 1943 memoirs, Always Room at the Top, Walska had tried every sort of fashionable mumbo jumbo to conquer her nerves and salvage her voice," reported The New York Times in 1996. "Nothing worked. During a performance of Giordano's Fedora in Havana she veered so persistently off key that the audience pelted her with rotten vegetables. It was an event that Orson Welles remembered when he began concocting the character of the newspaper publisher's second wife for Citizen Kane."[47]Charles Lederer, Marion Davies's nephew, read a draft of the script before filming began on Citizen Kane. "The script I read didn't have any flavor of Marion and Hearst," Lederer said. "Robert McCormick was the man it was about."[48] (Lederer confuses Walska's husband Harold F. McCormick with another member of the powerful Chicago family, one who also may also have inspired Welles crusading publisher Robert R. McCormick of the Chicago Tribune.) Although there were things based on Marion Davies jigsaw puzzles and drinking Lederer noted that they were exaggerated in the film to help define the characterization of Susan Alexander.[23]:497498"As for Marion," Orson Welles said, "she was an extraordinary woman nothing like the character Dorothy Comingore played in the movie."[23]:49Movie tycoon Jules Brulatour's second and third wives, Dorothy Gibson and Hope Hampton, both fleeting stars of the silent screen who later had marginal careers in opera, are also believed to have provided inspiration for the Susan Alexander character.[citation needed]The character of political boss Jim Gettys (Ray Collins) is based on Charles F. Murphy, a leader in New York City's infamous Tammany Hall political machine.[16]:61 William Randolph Hearst and Murphy were political allies in 1902, when Hearst was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives, but the two fell out in 1905 when Hearst ran for mayor of New York. Hearst turned his muckraking newspapers on Tammany Hall in the person of Murphy, who was called "the most hungry, selfish and extortionate boss Tammany has ever known." Murphy ordered that under no condition was Hearst to be elected. Hearst ballots were dumped into the East River, and new ballots were printed favoring his opponent. Hearst was defeated by some 3,000 votes and his newspapers bellowed against the election fraud. A historic cartoon of Murphy in convict stripes appeared November 10, 1905, three days after the vote.[49] The caption read, "Look out, Murphy! It's a Short Lockstep from Delmonico's to Sing Sing ... Every honest voter in New York wants to see you in this costume."[50]In Citizen Kane, Boss Jim Gettys (named Edward Rogers in the shooting script) admonishes Kane for printing a cartoon showing him in prison stripes:If I owned a newspaper and if I didn't like the way somebody else was doing things some politician, say I'd fight them with everything I had. Only I wouldn't show him in a convict suit with stripes so his children could see the picture in the paper. Or his mother.As he pursues Gettys down the stairs, Kane threatens to send him to Sing Sing.[51]As an inside joke, Welles named Gettys after the father-in-law of Roger Hill, his headmaster at the Todd School and a lifelong friend.[23]:63In This is Orson Welles, Welles credits the "Rosebud" device the journalist's search for the enigmatic meaning of Kane's last word, the device that frames the film to screenwriter Herman Mankiewicz. "Rosebud remained, because it was the only way we could find to get off, as they used to say in vaudeville," Welles said. "It manages to work, but I'm still not too keen about it, and I don't think that he was, either." The dialogue eventually reflects the screenwriters' desire to diminish the importance of the word's meaning; "We did everything we could to take the mickey out of it," Welles said.[23]:53As he began his first draft of the Citizen Kane screenplay in early 1940, Mankiewicz mentioned "Rosebud" to his secretary. When she asked, "Who is rosebud?" he replied, "It isn't a who, it's an it." The symbol of Mankiewicz's own damaged childhood was a treasured bicycle, stolen while he visited the public library and, in punishment, never replaced.[52] "He mourned that all his life," wrote film critic Pauline Kael, who believed Mankiewicz put the emotion of that boyhood loss into the loss that haunted Kane.[16]:60In his 2002 book Hearst Over Hollywood, Louis Pizzitola reports one historian's statement that "Rosebud" was a nickname given to William Randolph Hearst's mother by portrait and landscape painter Orrin Peck. The Peck family were intimates of the Hearsts, and Orrin Peck was said to be nearer to Phoebe Apperson Hearst than her own son.[53][54] Another theory of the origin of "Rosebud" is the similarity with the dying wish of Basil Zaharoff (who is one of the inspirations for the central character), to be wheeled "by the rosebush".[55]In 1989 author Gore Vidal stated that "Rosebud" was a nickname which Hearst had used for the clitoris of his mistress, Marion Davies. Vidal said that Davies had told this intimate detail to a close nephew, Charles Lederer, who had mentioned it to him years later.[56][57] The claim was repeated in the 1996 documentary The Battle Over Citizen Kane and again in the 1999 dramatic film RKO 281. Film critic Roger Ebert said, "Some people have fallen in love with the story that Herman Mankiewicz, the co-author with Welles of the screenplay, happened to know that 'Rosebud' was William Randolph Hearst's pet name for an intimate part of Marion Davies' anatomy."[58][59]Welles biographer Frank Brady traces the story to the popular press in the late 1970s:How Orson (or Mankiewicz) could have ever discovered this most private utterance is unexplained and why it took over 35 years for such a suggestive rationale to emerge, although the origins of everything to do with Citizen Kane had continually been placed under literary and cinematic microscopes for decades, is also unknown. If this highly unlikely story is even partially true ... Hearst may have become upset at the implied connotation, although any such connection seems to have been innocent on Welles's part. In any event, this bizarre explanation for the origin of one of the most famous words ever spoken on the screen has now made its way into serious studies of Welles and Citizen Kane.[60]Film critic David Thomson has stated that "Rosebud is the greatest secret in cinema . . ."[61]"Rosebud is the emblem of the security, hope and innocence of childhood, which a man can spend his life seeking to regain," summarized Roger Ebert. "It is the green light at the end of Gatsby's pier; the leopard atop Kilimanjaro, seeking nobody knows what; the bone tossed into the air in 2001."[62]Film scholars and historians view Citizen Kane as Welles's attempt to create a new style of filmmaking by studying various forms of movie making, and combining them all into one. However, in an interview in March 1960 with the BBC's Huw Wheldon, Welles stated that his love for cinema began only when he started the work on Citizen Kane, and when asked where he got the confidence from as a first-time director to direct a film so radically different from contemporary cinema, he responded, "[From] ignorance...sheer ignorance. There is no confidence to equal it. It's only when you know something about a profession that you are timid or careful."[63][64]The most innovative technical aspect of Citizen Kane is the extended use of deep focus.[65] In nearly every scene in the film, the foreground, background and everything in between are all in sharp focus. This was done by cinematographer Gregg Toland through his experimentation with lenses and lighting. Specifically, Toland often used telephoto lenses to shoot close-up scenes. Any time deep focus was impossible for example in the scene when Kane finishes a bad review of Alexander's opera while at the same time firing the person who started the review an optical printer was used to make the whole screen appear in focus (visually layering one piece of film onto another). However, some apparently deep-focus shots were the result of in-camera effects, as in the famous example of the scene where Kane breaks into Susan Alexander's room after her suicide attempt. In the background, Kane and another man break into the room, while simultaneously the medicine bottle and a glass with a spoon in it are in closeup in the foreground. The shot was an in-camera matte shot. The foreground was shot first, with the background dark. Then the background was lit, the foreground darkened, the film rewound, and the scene re-shot with the background action.Another unorthodox method used in the film was the way low-angle shots were used to display a point of view facing upwards, thus allowing ceilings to be shown in the background of several scenes.[66] Since movies were primarily filmed on sound stages and not on location during the era of the Hollywood studio system, it was impossible to film at an angle that showed ceilings because the stages had none. In some instances, Welles's crew used muslin draped above the set to produce the illusion of a regular room with a ceiling, while the boom microphones were hidden above the cloth and even dug a trench into the floor to allow the low-angle shot to be used in the scene where Kane meets Leland after his election loss.[67]Toland had approached Welles in 1940 to work on Citizen Kane. Welles's reputation for experimentation in the theatre appealed to Toland and he found a sympathetic partner to "test and prove several ideas generally being accepted as radical in Hollywood".[2] Welles credited Toland on the same card as himself. "It's impossible to say how much I owe to Gregg. He was superb," Welles said.[68]Citizen Kane eschews the traditional linear, chronological narrative and tells Kane's story entirely in flashback using different points of view, many of them from Kane's aged and forgetful associates, the cinematic equivalent of the unreliable narrator in literature.[69] Welles also dispenses with the idea of a single storyteller and uses multiple narrators to recount Kane's life. The use of multiple narrators was unheard of in Hollywood movies.[69] Each narrator recounts a different part of Kane's life, with each story partly overlapping.[70] The film depicts Kane as an enigma, a complicated man who, in the end, leaves viewers with more questions than answers as to his character, such as the newsreel footage where he is attacked for being both a communist and a fascist.[69] The technique of using flashbacks had been used in earlier films such as Wuthering Heights in 1939 and The Power and the Glory in 1933 but no film was so immersed in this technique as Citizen Kane. The use of the reporter Thompson acts as a surrogate for the audience, questioning Kane's associates and piecing together his life.[70]One of the narrative voices is the News on the March segment.[69] Its stilted dialogue and portentous voiceover is a parody of The March of Time newsreel series[71] which itself references an earlier newsreel which showed the 85-year old arms czar Sir Basil Zaharoff getting wheeled to his train. Welles had earlier provided voiceovers for the March of Time radio show. Citizen Kane makes extensive use of stock footage to create the newsreel.One of the story-telling techniques used in Citizen Kane was the use of montage to collapse time and space. Using an episodic sequence on the same set while the characters changed costume and make-up between cuts so that the scene following each cut would look as if it took place in the same location, but at a time long after the previous cut. In the breakfast montage, Welles chronicles the breakdown of Kane's first marriage in five vignettes that condense 16 years of story time into two minutes of screen time.[72] Welles said that the idea for the breakfast scene "was stolen from The Long Christmas Dinner of Thornton Wilder ... a one-act play, which is a long Christmas dinner that takes you through something like 60 years of a family's life."[23]:51Welles also pioneered several visual effects in order to cheaply shoot things like crowd scenes and large interior spaces. For example, the scene where the camera in the opera house rises dramatically to the rafters to show the workmen showing a lack of appreciation for the second Mrs. Kane's performance was shot by a camera craning upwards over the performance scene, then a curtain wipe to a miniature of the upper regions of the house, and then another curtain wipe matching it again with the scene of the workmen. Other scenes effectively employed miniatures to make the film look much more expensive than it truly was, such as various shots of Xanadu. A loud, full-screen closeup of a typewriter typing a single word ("weak"), magnifies the review for the Chicago Inquirer.[73]The make-up artist Maurice Seiderman created the make-up for the film.[13] RKO wanted the young Kane to look handsome and dashing, and Seiderman transformed the overweight Welles, beginning with his nose, which Welles always disliked. For the old Kane, Seiderman created a red plastic compound which he applied to Welles, allowing the wrinkles to move naturally.[13] Kane's mustache was made of several hair tufts. Transforming Welles into the old Kane required six to seven hours, meaning he had to start at two in the morning to begin filming at nine. He would hold conferences while sitting in the make-up chair; sometimes working 16 hours a day. Even breaking a leg during filming could not stop him from directing around the clock, and he quickly returned to acting, using a steel leg brace.[13]"Before Kane, nobody in Hollywood knew how to set music properly in movies," wrote filmmaker Franois Truffaut in a 1967 essay. "Kane was the first, in fact the only, great film that uses radio techniques."Behind each scene, there is a resonance which gives it its color: the rain on the windows of the cabaret, "El Rancho," when the investigator goes to visit the down-and-out female singer who can only "work" Atlantic City; the echoes in the marble-lined Thatcher library; the overlapping voices whenever there are several characters. A lot of filmmakers know enough to follow Auguste Renoir's advice to fill the eyes with images at all costs, but only Orson Welles understood that the sound track had to be filled in the same way.[74]In addition to expanding on the potential of sound as a creator of moods and emotions, Welles pioneered a new aural technique, known as the "lightning-mix". Welles used this technique to link complex montage sequences via a series of related sounds or phrases. In offering a continuous sound track, Welles was able to join what would otherwise be extremely rough cuts together into a smooth narrative. For example, the audience witnesses Kane grow from a child into a young man in just two shots. As Kane's guardian hands him his sled, Kane begrudgingly wishes him a "Merry Christmas". Suddenly we are taken to a shot of his guardian fifteen years later, only to have the phrase completed for us: "and a Happy New Year". In this case, the continuity of the soundtrack, not the image, is what makes for a seamless narrative structure.[75]Welles also carried over techniques from radio not yet popular in the movies (though they would become staples). Using a number of voices, each saying a sentence or sometimes merely a fragment of a sentence, and splicing the dialogue together in quick succession, the result gave the impression of a whole town talking and, equally important, what the town was talking about. Welles also favored the overlapping of dialogue, considering it more realistic than the stage and movie tradition of characters not stepping on each other's sentences. He also pioneered the technique of putting the audio ahead of the visual in scene transitions (a J-cut); as a scene would come to a close, the audio would transition to the next scene before the visuals did.In common with using personnel he had previously worked with in the Mercury Theatre, Welles recruited his close friend Bernard Herrmann to score Citizen Kane.[76] Herrmann was a longtime collaborator with Welles, providing music for almost all his radio broadcasts including The Fall of the City (1937) and the War of the Worlds (1938) broadcast.[77] The film was Herrmann's first motion picture score[76] and would be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Score, but would lose out to his own score for the film All That Money Can Buy.[76]Herrmann's score for Citizen Kane was a watershed in film soundtrack composition and proved as influential as any of the film's other innovations, establishing him as an important voice in film soundtrack composition.[7][77] The score eschewed the typical Hollywood practice of scoring a film with virtually non-stop music. Instead Herrmann used what he later described as '"radio scoring", musical cues which typically lasted between five and fifteen seconds to bridge the action or suggest a different emotional response. One of the most effective musical cues was the "Breakfast Montage." The scene begins with a graceful waltz theme and gets darker with each variation on that theme as the passage of time leads to the hardening of Kane's personality and the breakup of his marriage to Emily.[78]Herrmann realized that musicians slated to play his music were hired for individual unique sessions; there was no need to write for existing ensembles. This meant that he was free to score for unusual combinations of instruments, even instruments that are not commonly heard. In the opening sequence, for example, the tour of Kane's estate Xanadu, Herrmann introduces a recurring leitmotiv played by low woodwinds, including a quartet of bass flutes.[77] Much of the music used in the newsreel was taken from other sources; examples include the News on the March music which was taken from RKO's music library, Belgian March by Anthony Collins, and accompanies the newsreel titles; and an excerpt from Alfred Newman's score for Gunga Din which is used as the background for the exploration of Xanadu.[77] In the final sequence of the film, which shows the destruction of Rosebud in the fireplace of Kane's castle, Welles choreographed the scene while he had Herrmann's cue playing on the set.[79]For the operatic sequence which exposed Kane's protege Susan Alexander for the amateur she was, Herrmann composed a quasi-romantic scene, Aria from Salammb.[7] There did exist two treatments of this work by Gustave Flaubert's 1862 novel, including an opera by Ernest Reyer and an incomplete treatment by Modeste Mussorgsky. However, Herrmann made no reference to existing music. Herrmann put the aria in a key that would force the singer to strain to reach the high notes, culminating in a high D, well outside the range of Susan Alexander.[7][77] Herrmann said he wanted to convey the impression of "a terrified girl floundering in the quicksand of a powerful orchestra".[7] On the soundtrack it was soprano Jean Forward who actually sang the vocal part for actress Dorothy Comingore.[7]In 1972 Herrmann said "I was fortunate to start my career with a film like Citizen Kane, it's been a downhill run ever since!"[77] Shortly before his death in 1985, Welles told director Henry Jaglom that the score was fifty per cent responsible for the film's artistic success.[77]Herrmann was vocal in his criticism of Pauline Kael's claim that it was Mankiewicz, not Welles, who made the main thrust of the film, and also her assertions about the use of music in the film without consulting him:Pauline Kael has written in The Citizen Kane Book (1971), that the production wanted to use Massenet's "Thais" but could not afford the fee. But Miss Kael never wrote or approached me to ask about the music. We could easily have afforded the fee. The point is that its lovely little strings would not have served the emotional purpose of the film.[80]Opera lovers are frequently amused by the parody of vocal coaching that appears in a singing lesson given to Susan Alexander by Signor Matiste. The character attempts to sing the famous cavatina "Una voce poco fa" from Il barbiere di Siviglia by Gioachino Rossini, but the lesson is interrupted when Alexander sings a high note flat.Orson Welles said that the Nat King Cole Trio is heard performing the song, "It Can't Be Love," in one of the key scenes of Citizen Kane, the fight between Susan and Kane in the picnic tent. "I'd heard Nat King Cole and his trio in a little bar. I kind of based the whole scene around that song," Welles said. "The music is by Nat Cole it's his trio. He doesn't sing it he's too legitimate, we got some kind of low-down New Orleans voice [Alton Redd[81]] but it was his number and his trio."[23]:57 Bernard Herrmann denied unconfirmed reports that suggest Cole can also be heard playing in the scene where Thompson questions a down-at-heel Susan in the nightclub where she works.[81]Hearing about the film enraged Hearst so much that he banned any advertising, reviewing, or mentioning of it in his papers, and had his journalists libel Welles. Following lobbying from Hearst, the head of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Louis B. Mayer, acting on behalf of the whole film industry, made an offer to RKO Pictures of $805,000 to destroy all prints of the film and burn the negative.[82] Welles used Hearst's opposition to Citizen Kane as a pretext for previewing the movie in several opinion-making screenings in Los Angeles, lobbying for its artistic worth against the hostile campaign that Hearst was waging.[82]When George Schaefer of RKO rejected Hearst's offer to suppress the film, Hearst banned every newspaper and station in his media conglomerate from reviewing or even mentioning the movie. He also had many movie theaters ban it, and many did not show it through fear of being socially exposed by his massive newspaper empire.[83] The documentary The Battle Over Citizen Kane lays the blame for Citizen Kane's relative failure squarely at the feet of Hearst. The film did decent business at the box office; it went on to be the sixth highest grossing film in its year of release, a modest success its backers found acceptable. Nevertheless, the film's commercial performance fell short of its creators' expectations. In The Chief: The Life of William Randolph Hearst, David Nasaw points out that Hearst's actions were not the only reason Kane failed, however: the innovations Welles made with narrative, as well as the dark message at the heart of the film (that the pursuit of success is ultimately futile) meant that a popular audience could not appreciate its merits.[35]:572573In a pair of Arena documentaries about Welles's career produced and broadcast domestically by the BBC in 1982, Welles claimed that during opening week, a policeman approached him one night and told him: "Do not go to your hotel room tonight; Hearst has set up an undressed, underage girl to leap into your arms when you enter and a photographer to take pictures of you. Hearst is planning to publish it in all of his papers." Welles thanked the man and stayed out all night. However, it is not confirmed whether this was true. Welles also described how he accidentally bumped into Hearst in an elevator at the Fairmont Hotel when Kane was opening in San Francisco. Welles's father had been friends with Hearst, so Welles tried to comfortably ask if Hearst would see the film. Hearst ignored him. "As he was getting off at his floor, I said 'Charles Foster Kane would have accepted.' No reply", recalled the director. "And Kane would have you know. That was his style."[15]Although Hearst tried to suppress the film and limit its success, his efforts backfired in the long run, for now almost every reference to Hearst's life and career includes a reference to the parallels in the film. The irony of Hearst's attempts is that the film is now inexorably connected to him. This connection is reinforced by W. A. Swanberg's extensive biography entitled Citizen Hearst.Citizen Kane was to open at RKO's flagship theatre, Radio City Music Hall, but did not; a possible factor was Louella Parsons's threat that The American Weekly would run a defamatory story on the grandfather of major RKO stockholder Nelson Rockefeller.[14]:115 Other exhibitors feared retaliation and refused to handle the film. Schaefer lined up a few theaters but Welles grew impatient and threatened RKO with a lawsuit. Hearst papers refused to accept advertising for the film. Kane opened at the RKO Palace on Broadway in New York on May 1, 1941, in Chicago on May 6, and in Los Angeles on May 8.[14]:115 Kane did well in cities and larger towns but fared poorly in more remote areas. RKO still had problems getting exhibitors to show the film. For example, one chain controlling more than 500 theaters got Welles's film as part of a package but refused to play it, reportedly out of fear of Hearst.[14]:117 The Hearst newspapers's disruption of the film's release damaged its boxoffice performance and, as a result, Citizen Kane lost $160,000 during its initial run.[84]:164[85]The reviews for the film were overwhelmingly positive, although some reviewers were challenged by Welles's break with Hollywood traditions.[86] Kate Cameron, in her review for the New York Daily-News, said that Kane was "one of the most interesting and technically superior films that has ever come out of a Hollywood studio".[87] In his review for the New World Telegram, William Boehnel said that the film was "staggering and belongs at once among the greatest screen achievements".[88] Otis Ferguson, in his review for The New Republic, said that Kane was "the boldest free-hand stroke in major screen production since Griffith and Bitzer were running wild to unshackle the camera".[89] John O'Hara, in Newsweek, called it "the best picture he'd ever seen"[82] and Bosley Crowther writing in The New York Times wrote that "it comes close to being the most sensational film ever made in Hollywood".[82]In a 1941 review, Jorge Luis Borges called Citizen Kane a "metaphysical detective story", in that "...[its] subject (both psychological and allegorical) is the investigation of a man's inner self, through the works he has wrought, the words he has spoken, the many lives he has ruined..." Borges noted that "Overwhelmingly, endlessly, Orson Welles shows fragments of the life of the man, Charles Foster Kane, and invites us to combine them and reconstruct him." As well, "Forms of multiplicity and incongruity abound in the film: the first scenes record the treasures amassed by Kane; in one of the last, a poor woman, luxuriant and suffering, plays with an enormous jigsaw puzzle on the floor of a palace that is also a museum." Borges points out, "At the end we realize that the fragments are not governed by a secret unity: the detested Charles Foster Kane is a simulacrum, a chaos of appearances."[90]Citizen Kane, with nine nominations, was the 16th film to get more than six Academy Awards nominations.[91][92] It was nominated for the following awards:[93]It was widely thought the film would win most of the awards it was nominated for, but it only won the Best Writing (Original Screenplay) Oscar.[14]:117Film editor Robert Wise recalled each time Citizen Kane's name was called out as a nominee, the crowd booed.[5] Most of Hollywood did not want the film to see the light of day, considering the threats that William Randolph Hearst had made if it did. According to Variety, bloc voting against Welles by screen extras denied him Best Picture and Actor awards.[94] British film critic Barry Norman attributed this to Hearst's wrath.[13]The National Board of Review gave 1941 "Best Acting" awards to Orson Welles and George Coulouris, and the film itself "Best Picture." That same year, the New York Times named it one of the Ten Best Films of the year, and the New York Film Critics Circle Award for "Best Picture" also went to Citizen Kane.[95]By 1942 Citizen Kane had run its course theatrically and, apart from a few showings at big city arthouse cinemas, it largely vanished from America until 1956. In that period, Kane's and Welles's reputation fell among American critics. In 1949 critic Richard Griffith in his overview of cinema, The Film Till Now, dismissed Kane as "tinpot if not crackpot Freud."[14]:117118Due to World War II, Citizen Kane was little seen in Europe. It was not until 1946 that it was shown in France, where it gained considerable acclaim, particularly from film critics such as Andr Bazin and from Cahiers du cinma writers, including future film directors Franois Truffaut and Jean-Luc Godard. In his 1950 essay "The Evolution of Cinema", Bazin placed Citizen Kane centre stage as a work which ushered in a new period in cinema.[96]In the United States, it was neglected and forgotten until its revival on television in the mid-1950s. Three key events in 1956 led to its re-evaluation in the United States. RKO was one of the first studios to sell its library to television and early that year Citizen Kane started to appear on television. Around the same time the film was re-released theatrically to coincide with Welles return to the New York stage where he played King Lear. That year American film critic Andrew Sarris wrote "Citizen Kane: The American Baroque" for Film Culture and described it as "the great American film,"[97] further enhancing the film's status. During the Expo 58, a poll of over 100 film historians named The Battleship Potemkin the greatest film ever made, while Kane was part of the top ten. When a group of young film directors cast their vote for their top six, they were booed at the announcement for not including the film.[15]In the decades since, its critical status as one of the greatest films ever made has grown with numerous essays and books on it including influential books like Peter Cowie's The Cinema of Orson Welles, Ronald Gottesman's Focus on Citizen Kane, a collection of significant reviews and background pieces, and most notably Kael's essay, "Raising Kane", which promoted the value of the film to a much wider audience than it had reached before.[14]:120 Despite its criticism of Welles it further popularized the notion of Citizen Kane as the great American film. The rise of art house and film society circuits also aided in the film's rediscovery.[14]:119The British magazine Sight & Sound has produced a Top Ten list surveying film critics every decade since 1952 and is regarded as one of the most respected barometers of critical taste.[98] Citizen Kane was a runner up to the top 10 in its 1952 poll but was voted as the greatest film ever made in its 1962 poll and[99] it has retained the top spot in every subsequent poll [100][101] until 2012, when Vertigo claimed the top spot.The film has also ranked number one in the following film "best of" lists: Editorial Jaguar, FIAF Centenary List, France Critics Top 10, Cahiers du cinma 100 films pour une cinmathque idale,[102] Kinovedcheskie Russia Top 10, Romanian Critics Top 10, Time Out Magazine Greatest Films, and Village Voice 100 Greatest Films. Roger Ebert called Citizen Kane the greatest movie ever made: "But people don't always ask about the greatest film. They ask, 'What's your favorite movie?' Again, I always answer with Citizen Kane."[103]In 1989, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.[104]As Mimi O'Connor wrote in her 2009 book Reel Culture: 50 Classic Movies You Should Know About (So You Can Impress Your Friends, "It used innovative (at the time) film-making techniques like deep focus (when all images in a frame are in sharp focus), flashbacks, unconventional camera angles, and dark lighting. All of this changed how a movie could look, how a story could be told, and how the psychology and circumstances of a character could be communicated on screen".[citation needed]The film currently has a 100% rating at Rotten Tomatoes, based on 63 reviews.[105]American Film Institute recognitionDespite its status as a revered classic, Citizen Kane is not entirely without its critics. Boston University film scholar Ray Carney, although noting its technical achievements, criticized what he saw as the film's lack of emotional depth, shallow characterization and empty metaphors. Listing it among the most overrated works within the film community, he accused the film of being "an all-American triumph of style over substance."[107] The Swedish director Ingmar Bergman once stated his dislike for the movie, calling it "a total bore" and claiming that the "performances are worthless." He went on to call Orson Welles an "infinitely overrated filmmaker."[108]Similarly, James Agate wrote, "I thought the photography quite good, but nothing to write to Moscow about, the acting middling, and the whole thing a little dull...Mr. Welles's high-brow direction is of that super-clever order which prevents you from seeing what that which is being directed is all about."[109]Despite the critical success of Citizen Kane it nevertheless marked a decline in Welles's fortunes. In the book Whatever Happened to Orson Welles?, Joseph McBride argues that the problems in making Citizen Kane caused lasting damage to his career. The damage started with RKO violating its contract with him by taking his next film The Magnificent Ambersons away from him and adding a happy ending against his will.[15] Hollywood's treatment of Welles and his work ultimately led to his self-imposed exile in Europe for much of the rest of his career where he found a more sympathetic audience.The documentary The Battle Over Citizen Kane posits that Welles's own life story resembled that of Kane far more than Hearst's: an overreaching wunderkind who ended up mournful and lonely in his old age. Citizen Kane's editor Robert Wise summarized: "Well, I thought often afterwards, only in recent years when I saw the film again two or three years ago when they had the fiftieth anniversary, and I suddenly thought to myself, well, Orson was doing an autobiographical film and didn't realize it, because it's rather much the same, you know. You start here, and you have a big rise and tremendous prominence and fame and success and whatnot, and then tail off and tail off and tail off. And at least the arc of the two lives were very much the same..."[5]Peter Bogdanovich, who was friends with Welles in his later years, disagreed with this on his own commentary on the Citizen Kane DVD, saying that Kane was nothing like Welles. Kane, he said, "had none of the qualities of an artist, Orson had all the qualities of an artist." Bogdanovich also noted that Welles was never bitter "about all the bad things that happened to him", and was a man who enjoyed life in his final years. In addition, critics have reassessed Welles career after his death, saying that he wasnt a failed Hollywood filmmaker, but a successful independent filmmaker.[110]Film critic Kim Newman believed the film's influence was visible in the film noir that followed, as well as the 1942 Hepburn-Tracy film Keeper of the Flame. Film directors Steven Spielberg, Martin Scorsese, Michael Mann, Ridley Scott, Francis Ford Coppola, Bryan Singer, Stephen Frears, Brian De Palma, John Frankenheimer, the Coen brothers, Sergio Leone and Luc Besson are all fans of Citizen Kane and it influenced their work.[citation needed]The film's structure influenced the biographical films Lawrence of Arabia and Mishima: A Life in Four Chapters which begin with the subject's death and show their life in flashbacks as well as Welles's thriller Mr. Arkadin.[15]The film, for its topic of mass media manipulation of public opinion, is also famous for having been frequently presented as the perfect example to demonstrate the power that media have on a society in influencing the democratic process. This exemplary citation of the film lasted till the end of the 20th century, when the paradigm of mass media depicted in Citizen Kane needed to be updated to take into account more globalized and more internet-based media scenarios. Since the film was based on William Randolph Hearst's actions in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, that model of media influence lasted for almost a century.[111] Media mogul Rupert Murdoch is sometimes labeled as a latter-day Citizen Kane.[112][113]In 1955, RKO sold the American television rights to its film library, including Citizen Kane, to C&C Television Corp.[114] TV rights to the pre-1956 RKO library were acquired by United Artists in 1960. RKO kept the non-broadcast TV rights to its library and formed RKO Home Video in 1984.[115] RKO, which had licensed the film to other home video companies, reissued the film in 1985 on VHS and Beta,[116] but sold the laserdisc video rights to Citizen Kane (along with King Kong) to The Criterion Collection in 1984. Turner Broadcasting System acquired broadcast TV rights to the library when it acquired MGM/UA in 1986.[117] Unable to sustain the debt load, Turner split up MGM/UA and kept the MGM film library including American TV rights to the RKO library.[118] Turner acquired full U.S and Canadian distribution rights to the RKO library in 1987[119] The RKO Home Video unit was reorganized into Turner Home Entertainment that year.[120] For the film's 50th anniversary in 1991, Turner Entertainment utilized Paramount Pictures as its distributor for the film's re-release to theaters.[121] In 1996, Time Warner acquired Turner and Warner Home Video absorbed Turner Home Entertainment.[122] Today, Time Warner's Warner Bros. unit has distribution rights for Citizen Kane.[1]However outside Region 1 (U.S and Canada), the distribution rights to Citizen Kane are in other hands. This includes; Universal Studios in the U.K, Aris in France, EOS Entertainment in Germany, RAI in Italy and Magna Pacific in Australia and New Zealand.The composited camera negative of Citizen Kane was destroyed in a New Jersey film laboratory fire in the 1970s. Subsequent prints were ultimately derived from a master positive (a fine-grain preservation element) made in the 1940s and originally intended for use in overseas distribution.[123] Fortunately, the sound track had not been lost.Modern techniques were used to produce a pristine print for a 50th Anniversary theatrical revival reissue in 1991 (released by Paramount Pictures). The 2003 British DVD edition is taken from a master positive held by the British Film Institute. The current US DVD version (released by Warner Home Video) is taken from another digital restoration, supervised by Turner's company.[citation needed] The transfer to Region 1 DVD has been criticized by some film experts for being too bright. Also, in the scene in Bernstein's office (chapter 10), rain falling outside the window has been digitally erased, probably because it was thought to be excessive film grain. These alterations are not present in the UK Region 2, which is also considered to be more accurate in terms of contrast and brightness.In 2003, Orson Welles's daughter Beatrice sued Turner Entertainment and RKO Pictures, claiming that the Welles estate is the legal copyright holder of the film. Her attorney said that Orson Welles had left RKO with an exit deal terminating his contracts with the studio, meaning that Welles still had an interest in the film and his previous contract giving the studio the copyright of the film was null and void. Beatrice Welles also claimed that, if the courts did not uphold her claim of copyright, RKO nevertheless owed the estate 20% of the profits, from a previous contract which has not been lived up to.On May 30, 2007, the appeals panel agreed that Beatrice Welles could proceed with the lawsuit against Turner Entertainment; the opinion partially overturns the 2004 decision by a lower court judge who had found in favor of Turner Entertainment on the issue of video rights.[124]In the 1980s, this film became the catalyst in the controversy over the colorization of black-and-white films. When Ted Turner told members of the press that he was considering colorizing Citizen Kane, his comments led to an immediate public outcry. About two weeks before his death, and almost a year before Turner acquired the rights to the MGM catalog, Welles had asked filmmaker Henry Jaglom, "Please do this for me. Don't let Ted Turner deface my movie with his crayons."[125] The uproar was for nothing, as Turner could not have colorized the film had he wanted to. Welles's original contract prevented any alteration to the film without his, and eventually his estate's, express consent.[126] Turner later claimed that this was a joke intended to needle colorization critics, and that he had never had any intention of coloring the film.[citation needed] In December 1989 Turner Home Entertainment did, however, release a colorized version of The Magnificent Ambersons on VHS.[127]On September 13, 2011, Citizen Kane was released on Blu-ray disc and DVD in a 70th anniversary box set called The Ultimate Collectors Edition. "This, quite simply, is the Blu-ray release of the year," wrote the San Francisco Chronicle. "Anyone who thinks Blu-ray doesn't make much of a difference to an older, B&W movie hasn't seen this reference-quality work by Warner Home Video."[128] "Citizen Kane is a film whose visual scintillation is ageless, and you have never seen it look as good as it does here, in Warner's newly restored, 1080p, AVC/MPEG-4 transfer," wrote DVD Talk. Supplements include separate commentary tracks by Roger Ebert and Peter Bogdanovich, carried forward from Warner's 60th anniversary edition DVD release; two additional films, The Battle Over Citizen Kane and RKO 281; and packaging extras that include a hardcover booklet and a folio containing a reproduction of the original souvenir program, miniature lobby cards and other memorabilia.[129]In June 1982 Steven Spielberg spent $60,500 to buy a Rosebud sled, one of three balsa sleds used in the closing scenes and the only one that was not burned.[134] Spielberg had paid homage to Citizen Kane in the final shot of the government warehouse in his 1981 film, Raiders of the Lost Ark. Spielberg commented, "Rosebud will go over my typewriter to remind me that quality in movies comes first."[135][136]After the Spielberg purchase, news outlets began reporting the claim of Arthur Bauer, a retired helicopter pilot in New York, that he owned another Rosebud, the hardwood sled used at the beginning of Citizen Kane. "I'm sure it could be true," Welles said when asked for comment.[137] In early 1942, Bauer was a 12-year-old student in Brooklyn and a member of his school's film club. He entered and won an RKO Pictures publicity contest and selected Rosebud as his prize. In 1996, Bauer's estate offered the painted pine sled at auction through Christie's.[138] Bauer's son told CBS News that his mother had once wanted to paint the sled and use it as a plant stand; "Instead, my dad said, 'No, just save it and put it in the closet.'"[139] On December 15, 1996, the hardwood sled was sold to an anonymous bidder in Los Angeles for $233,500.[140]On February 18, 1999, the United States Postal Service honored Citizen Kane by including it in its Celebrate the Century series.[141] The film was honored again February 25, 2003, in a series of U.S. postage stamps marking the 75th anniversary of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Art director Perry Ferguson represents the behind-the-scenes craftsmen of filmmaking in the series; he is depicted completing a sketch for Citizen Kane.[142]In December 2007, Welles's personal copy of the last revised draft of Citizen Kane before the shooting script was sold at Sotheby's in New York for $97,000.[143] Welles's Oscar for best original screenplay was offered for sale at the same auction, but failed to reach its estimate of $800,000 to $1.2 million.[143] The Oscar, which was believed to have been lost by Welles, was rediscovered in 1994, was owned by the Dax Foundation, a Los Angeles based charity,[143] and was sold at auction in 2011 by an anonymous seller to an anonymous buyer for $861,542.[144]Parodies of Citizen Kane include "Rosebud", an episode of The Simpsons which first aired on 21 October 1993.[original research?]In The Life and Times of Scrooge McDuck, a book by Don Rosa, there are several references to Citizen Kane.[citation needed] The most notable one appears in chapter 12, entitled "The Richest Duck in the World". That story is set on the day after the events in the story of "Christmas on Bear Mountain", while Scrooge McDuck sits inside his mansion. In 1941 he had retired, bought his estate, and disposed of his financial empire. In the beginning of chapter 12, Scrooge sits in a chair, sleeping and dreaming about his youth. He holds a snowglobe portraying his hut, named Klondike, where he had made his fortune, and he speaks the word "Goldie..." (an allusion to Glittering Goldie, a supposed love interest). Next a newsreel recounts the transition of Duckburg from an old fort to the present town; it ends with the question of what is stored inside the money bin.Herman J. MankiewiczOrson WellesOrson WellesJoseph CottenDorothy ComingoreEverett SloaneRay CollinsGeorge CoulourisAgnes MooreheadPaul StewartRuth WarrickErskine SanfordWilliam AllandMay 1, 1941(1941-05-01)1 Plot2 Cast and characters

2.1 Major characters
2.2 Minor characters

2.1 Major characters2.2 Minor characters3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Pre-release controversy

3.1 Development3.2 Pre-release controversy4 Screenplay

4.1 Development

4.1.1 Mankiewicz as co-writer
4.1.2 Ideas and collaboration
4.1.3 Hearst as story model


4.2 Authorship

4.1 Development

4.1.1 Mankiewicz as co-writer
4.1.2 Ideas and collaboration
4.1.3 Hearst as story model

4.1.1 Mankiewicz as co-writer4.1.2 Ideas and collaboration4.1.3 Hearst as story model4.2 Authorship5 Sources

5.1 Charles Foster Kane
5.2 Jedediah Leland
5.3 Susan Alexander
5.4 Jim Gettys
5.5 "Rosebud"

5.1 Charles Foster Kane5.2 Jedediah Leland5.3 Susan Alexander5.4 Jim Gettys5.5 "Rosebud"6 Filmmaking innovations

6.1 Cinematography
6.2 Storytelling techniques
6.3 Special effects
6.4 Makeup
6.5 Soundtrack
6.6 Music

6.1 Cinematography6.2 Storytelling techniques6.3 Special effects6.4 Makeup6.5 Soundtrack6.6 Music7 Reception

7.1 Hearst's response
7.2 Release and contemporary responses

7.2.1 Awards

7.2.1.1 14th Academy Awards (Oscars) 1941
7.2.1.2 Other awards




7.3 Subsequent re-evaluation and recognition

7.3.1 Negative criticism



7.1 Hearst's response7.2 Release and contemporary responses

7.2.1 Awards

7.2.1.1 14th Academy Awards (Oscars) 1941
7.2.1.2 Other awards



7.2.1 Awards

7.2.1.1 14th Academy Awards (Oscars) 1941
7.2.1.2 Other awards

7.2.1.1 14th Academy Awards (Oscars) 19417.2.1.2 Other awards7.3 Subsequent re-evaluation and recognition

7.3.1 Negative criticism

7.3.1 Negative criticism8 Legacy9 Distribution rights10 Prints11 Home video releases

11.1 Blu-ray
11.2 Other home video releases

11.1 Blu-ray11.2 Other home video releases12 Popular culture13 See also14 Bibliography15 References16 External links2.1 Major characters2.2 Minor characters3.1 Development3.2 Pre-release controversy4.1 Development

4.1.1 Mankiewicz as co-writer
4.1.2 Ideas and collaboration
4.1.3 Hearst as story model

4.1.1 Mankiewicz as co-writer4.1.2 Ideas and collaboration4.1.3 Hearst as story model4.2 Authorship4.1.1 Mankiewicz as co-writer4.1.2 Ideas and collaboration4.1.3 Hearst as story model5.1 Charles Foster Kane5.2 Jedediah Leland5.3 Susan Alexander5.4 Jim Gettys5.5 "Rosebud"6.1 Cinematography6.2 Storytelling techniques6.3 Special effects6.4 Makeup6.5 Soundtrack6.6 Music7.1 Hearst's response7.2 Release and contemporary responses

7.2.1 Awards

7.2.1.1 14th Academy Awards (Oscars) 1941
7.2.1.2 Other awards



7.2.1 Awards

7.2.1.1 14th Academy Awards (Oscars) 1941
7.2.1.2 Other awards

7.2.1.1 14th Academy Awards (Oscars) 19417.2.1.2 Other awards7.3 Subsequent re-evaluation and recognition

7.3.1 Negative criticism

7.3.1 Negative criticism7.2.1 Awards

7.2.1.1 14th Academy Awards (Oscars) 1941
7.2.1.2 Other awards

7.2.1.1 14th Academy Awards (Oscars) 19417.2.1.2 Other awards7.2.1.1 14th Academy Awards (Oscars) 19417.2.1.2 Other awards7.3.1 Negative criticism11.1 Blu-ray11.2 Other home video releasesOrson Welles as Charles Foster Kane: the titular "Citizen Kane"; a wealthy, megalomaniacal newspaper publisher whose life is the subject of the movie.William Alland as Jerry Thompson: the reporter in charge of finding out the meaning of Kane's last word, "Rosebud". Thompson is seen only in shadow or with his back turned to the camera.Ray Collins as Jim W. Gettys: Kane's political rival and the incumbent governor of New York. Kane appears to be the frontrunner in the campaign, but Gettys exposes Kane's relationship with Susan Alexander which leads to his defeat.Dorothy Comingore as Susan Alexander Kane: Kane's mistress, who later becomes his second wife.Joseph Cotten as Jedediah Leland: Kane's best friend and the first reporter on Kane's paper. Leland continues to work for Kane as his empire grows, although they grow apart over the years. Kane fires Leland after he writes a bad review of Susan Alexander Kane's operatic debut (which, ironically, Kane himself finished when a drunk Leland fell unconscious).George Coulouris as Walter Parks Thatcher: a miserly banker who becomes Kane's legal guardian.Agnes Moorehead as Mary Kane: Kane's mother.Harry Shannon as Jim Kane: Kane's father.Everett Sloane as Mr. Bernstein: Kane's friend and employee who remains loyal to him to the end. According to RKO records, Sloane was paid $2400 for shaving his head.[2]Ruth Warrick as Emily Monroe Norton Kane: Kane's first wife and the niece of the President. She leaves him after discovering his affair with Susan Alexander. She dies in a car accident along with their only child, a son, a few years later. Warrick was the last surviving member of the main players at the time of her death in 2005.Paul Stewart as Raymond: Kane's cynical butler who assists him in his later years. Stewart had discovered Welles when he was a radio producer.[9]Georgia Backus as Bertha AndersonFortunio Bonanova as Signor MatisteSonny Bupp as Charles Foster Kane III: Kane's son who later dies in a car accident with his mother (though only the voiceover narration acknowledges this). Bupp was the last surviving credited cast member of Citizen Kane when he died in 2007.[10]Buddy Swan as Young Charles Foster KaneErskine Sanford as Herbert CarterGus Schilling as The HeadwaiterPhilip Van Zandt as Mr. RawlstonBit player Louise Currie, uncredited for her role as a reporter at Xanadu, was still living as of August 2012.[11]Outstanding Motion Picture RKO Radio Pictures (Orson Welles, Producer)Best Director Orson WellesBest Actor Orson WellesBest Writing (Original Screenplay) Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson WellesBest Art Direction (Black-and-White) Perry Ferguson, Van Nest Polglase, A. Roland Fields, Darrell SilveraBest Film Editing Robert WiseBest Cinematography (Black-and-White) Gregg TolandBest Music (Score of a Dramatic Picture) Bernard HerrmannBest Sound Recording John O. AalbergAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies No. 1[citation needed]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Rosebud" No. 17[citation needed]

"Rosebud" No. 17[citation needed]AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores Nominated[106]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) No. 1[citation needed]"Rosebud" No. 17[citation needed]2011: Warner Home Video, September 13, 2011, Blu-ray and DVD. 70th Anniversary Ultimate Collectors Edition, UPC 883929184804 (Blu-ray), 883929184811 (DVD)1978: The Nostalgia Merchant, Media Home Entertainment, 1978, VHS and Beta. In 1976, when home video was in its infancy, entrepreneur Snuff Garrett bought cassette rights to the old RKO and Republic films for what United Press International termed "a pittance." By 1980, the 800-title library of The Nostalgia Merchant was earning $2.3 million a year. "Nobody wanted cassettes four years ago," Garrett told UPI. "It wasn't the first time people called me crazy. It was a hobby with me which became big business."[130]1982: VidAmerica, Inc., 1982, VHS and Beta. UPC 0820871090361984: The Criterion Collection, December 1, 1984, videodisc, spine 001. The Criterion Collection began with the laserdisc release of Citizen Kane, from a fine grain master positive provided by the UCLA Film and Television Archive.[131]1985: RKO Home Video, 1985, VHS and Beta1991: Turner Home Entertainment, August 1991, VHS. 50th Anniversary Edition. Also available in gift pack with film, documentary Reflections On Citizen Kane and Harlan Lebo's 50th anniversary album; and in a collector's edition that includes the film, documentary, album, poster and a copy of the original script.[132]1992: The Criterion Collection, February 26, 1992, videodisc, spine 142. 50th Anniversary Edition. This version had an improved transfer and several special features not on the original 1984 laserdisc, including the documentary The Legacy of Citizen Kane (incorporating interviews with 35 filmmakers) and Welles' early short The Hearts of Age.[133]2001: Warner Home Video, September 25, 2001, DVD. 60th Anniversary Collectors Edition. Two-disc special edition DVD including feature-length commentaries by film critic Roger Ebert and director Peter Bogdanovich and the PBS documentary The Battle Over Citizen Kane. ISBN 0-7806-3520-52001: Warner Home Video, September 25, 2001, VHS. 60th Anniversary Collectors Edition.Beyond Citizen KaneList of films considered the bestTwist endingBogdanovich, Peter and Orson Welles. This is Orson Welles, HarperPerennial 1992, ISBN 0-06-092439-XBogdanovich, Peter "The Kane Mutiny", in Esquire, October 1972. This piece, which demolishes Pauline Kael's claim that Welles did not write Citizen Kane, was credited to Bogdanovich. While Bogdanovich extensively helped with the background research, it was actually written by Welles himself.[145]Callow, Simon. Orson Welles: The Road to Xanadu London: Johnathon Cape, 1995. ISBN 0-224-03852-4Carringer, Robert L., The Making of Citizen Kane. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1985 ISBN 0-520-05367-2 hardcover; 1996 revised and updated edition ISBN 0-520-20567-7 paperbackCarringer, Robert L., "The Scripts of Citizen Kane", in Critical Inquiry No. 5 (1978), subsequently reprinted in the below 1996 volume by Gottesman.Cook, David A. Orson Welles and the modern sound film. A History of Narrative Film. W.W. Norton Company, Inc, 2004, ISBN 0-393-97868-0Gottesman, Ronald, ed. Focus on Citizen Kane. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1971, ISBN 0-13-134742-XGottesman, Ronald. Perspectives on Citizen Kane. G.K. Hall & Co., New York, 1996, ISBN 978-0-8161-1616-4Heylin, Clinton. Despite the System: Orson Welles Versus the Hollywood Studios, Chicago Review Press, 2005, ISBN 1-55652-547-8Kael, Pauline (ed.). The Citizen Kane Book Little and Brown, Boston, 1971 contains Kael's controversial and much-derided article Raising Kane, as well as the full script by Mankiewicz and Welles.Mulvey, Laura. Citizen Kane British Film Institute, London, 1992, ISBN 0-85170-339-9Naremore, James (ed.). Orson Welles's Citizen Kane: A Casebook in Criticism, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2004, ISBN 978-0-19-515892-2Nasaw, David. The Chief: The Life of William Randolph Hearst.New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2000, ISBN 978-0-618-15446-3Rippy, Marguerite H. Orson Welles and the Unfinished RKO Projects: A Postmodern Perspective, Southern Illinois University Press, Illinois, 2009, ISBN 978-0-8093-2912-0Rosenbaum, Jonathan. "I missed it at the movies: objections to Raising Kane" (1971), in Rosenbaum, Jonathan (ed.). Discovering Orson Welles, University of California Press, Berkeley, 2007, ISBN 978-0-520-25123-6Citizen Kane Official site from Warner Bros.Citizen Kane at the Internet Movie DatabaseCitizen Kane at AllRoviCitizen Kane at the TCM Movie DatabaseCitizen Kane at the American Film Institute CatalogCitizen Kane at Rotten TomatoesCitizen Kane bibliography via the UC Berkeley Media Resources CenterThe American Film Institute's "100 Greatest Movies" listCitizen Kane and Bernard Herrmann's film scorePBS: Citizen KaneBright Lights Film Journal EssayRoger Ebert: Citizen KaneThe Unofficial Citizen Kane PageTime Magazine Top 100Greatest filmsDVD ReviewCitizen Kane at TV TropesScene-by-scene analysis at Movie MovieCasablanca is a 1942 American romantic drama film directed by Michael Curtiz and based on the unpublished stage play Everybody Comes to Rick's by Murray Burnett and Joan Alison. The film stars Humphrey Bogart, Ingrid Bergman and Paul Henreid, and features Claude Rains, Conrad Veidt, Sydney Greenstreet, Peter Lorre and Dooley Wilson. Set during World WarII, it focuses on a man torn between, in the words of one character, love and virtue. He must choose between his love for a woman and helping her Czech Resistance leader husband escape from the Vichy-controlled Moroccan city of Casablanca to continue his fight against the Nazis.Story editor Irene Diamond convinced producer Hal Wallis to purchase the film rights of the play in January 1942. Brothers Julius J. and Philip G. Epstein were initially assigned to write the script. However, the Epsteins left the project after the attack on Pearl Harbor. Howard Koch was assigned to continue writing the screenplay until the Epsteins returned to work on Casablanca. Casey Robinson assisted with three weeks of rewrites, but his work would later go uncredited. Wallis chose Curtiz to direct the film after his first choice, William Wyler, became unavailable. Filming began on May 25, 1942 and ended on August 3, and was shot entirely in the studio and Van Nuys Airport.Although Casablanca was an A-list film, with established stars and first-rate writersthe Epsteins and Koch received credit for the screenplayno one involved with its production expected the film to be anything out of the ordinary;[1] it was just one of hundreds of pictures produced by Hollywood every year. Casablanca had its world premiere on November 26, 1942 in New York City, and was released on January 23, 1943 in the United States. The film was a solid, if unspectacular, success in its initial run, rushed into release to take advantage of the publicity from the Allied invasion of North Africa a few weeks earlier.[2] Despite a changing assortment of screenwriters frantically adapting an unstaged play and barely keeping ahead of production, and Bogart attempting his first romantic leading role, Casablanca won three Academy Awards, including Best Picture. The film is consistently ranked near the top of lists of the greatest films of all time.Cynical American expatriate Rick Blaine (Humphrey Bogart) is the proprietor of an upscale nightclub and gambling den in Casablanca in early December 1941. "Rick's Caf Amricain" attracts a mixed clientele: Vichy French, Italian, and Nazi officials; refugees desperate to reach the still neutral United States; and those who prey on them. Although Rick professes to be neutral in all matters, it is later revealed he ran guns to Ethiopia to combat the 1935 Italian invasion and fought on the Loyalist side in the Spanish Civil War.Petty crook Ugarte (Peter Lorre) shows up and boasts to Rick of "letters of transit" obtained by murdering two German couriers. The papers allow the bearer to travel around German-controlled Europe and to neutral Portugal, and are thus almost priceless to the refugees stranded in Casablanca. Ugarte plans to sell them at the club later that night. Before the exchange can take place, however, he is arrested by the local police under the command of Vichy Captain Louis Renault (Claude Rains), an unabashedly corrupt official. Ugarte dies in custody without revealing that he had entrusted the letters to Rick.At this point, the reason for Rick's bitternesshis ex-lover, Norwegian Ilsa Lund (Ingrid Bergman)walks into his establishment. Upon spotting Rick's friend and house pianist, Sam (Dooley Wilson), Ilsa asks him to play "As Time Goes By". Rick storms over, furious that Sam has disobeyed his order never to perform that song, and is stunned to see Ilsa. She is accompanied by her husband, Victor Laszlo (Paul Henreid), a renowned fugitive Czech Resistance leader. They need the letters to escape to America, where he can continue his work. German Major Strasser (Conrad Veidt) comes to Casablanca to see that Laszlo does not succeed.When Laszlo makes inquiries, Ferrari (Sydney Greenstreet), a major underworld figure and Rick's friendly business rival, divulges his suspicion that Rick has the letters. In private, Rick refuses to sell at any price, telling Laszlo to ask his wife the reason. They are interrupted when Strasser leads a group of officers in singing "Die Wacht am Rhein". Laszlo orders the house band to play "La Marseillaise". When the band looks to Rick, he nods his head. Laszlo starts singing, alone at first, then patriotic fervor grips the crowd and everyone joins in, drowning out the Germans. In retaliation, Strasser has Renault close the club.That night, Ilsa confronts Rick in the deserted caf. When he refuses to give her the letters, she threatens him with a gun, but then confesses that she still loves him. She explains that when they first met and fell in love in Paris, she believed that her husband had been killed attempting to escape from a concentration camp. Later, while preparing to flee with Rick from the imminent fall of the city to the German army, she learned that Laszlo was alive and in hiding. She left Rick without explanation to tend her ill husband.With the revelation, the lovers are reconciled. Rick agrees to help, leading her to believe that she will stay behind with him when Laszlo leaves. When Laszlo unexpectedly shows up, having narrowly escaped a police raid on a Resistance meeting, Rick has waiter Carl (S. K. Sakall) spirit Ilsa away.Laszlo, aware of Rick's love for Ilsa, tries to persuade him to use the letters to take her to safety. When the police arrest Laszlo on a minor, trumped-up charge, Rick convinces Renault to release him by promising to set him up for a much more serious crime: possession of the letters of transit. To allay Renault's suspicions, Rick explains he and Ilsa will be leaving for America.When Renault tries to arrest Laszlo as arranged, Rick forces him at gunpoint to assist in their escape. At the last moment, Rick makes Ilsa board the plane to Lisbon with her husband, telling her she would regret it if she stayed, "Maybe not today, maybe not tomorrow, but soon and for the rest of your life."Major Strasser, tipped off by Renault, drives up alone. Rick shoots Strasser when he tries to intervene. When the police arrive, Renault pauses, then tells them to "round up the usual suspects." Renault suggests to Rick that they join the Free French at Brazzaville as they walk away into the fog.The play's cast consisted of 16 speaking parts and several extras; the film script enlarged it to 22 speaking parts and hundreds of extras.[3] The cast is notable for its internationalism: only three of the credited actors were born in the United States. The top-billed actors were:The second-billed actors were:Also credited were:Notable uncredited actors were:Part of the emotional impact of the film has been attributed to the large proportion of European exiles and refugees among the extras and in the minor roles. A witness to the filming of the "duel of the anthems" sequence said he saw many of the actors crying and "realized that they were all real refugees".[15] Harmetz argues that they "brought to a dozen small roles in Casablanca an understanding and a desperation that could never have come from Central Casting".[16] The German citizens among them nevertheless had to keep curfew as enemy aliens. Ironically, they were frequently cast as the Nazis from whom they had fled.Some of the exiled actors were:The film was based on Murray Burnett and Joan Alison's then-unproduced play Everybody Comes to Rick's.[17] The Warner Bros. story analyst who read the play, Stephen Karnot, called it (approvingly) "sophisticated hokum",[18] and story editor Irene Diamond convinced producer Hal Wallis to buy the rights in January 1942 for $20,000,[19] the most anyone in Hollywood had ever paid for an unproduced play.[20] The project was renamed Casablanca, apparently in imitation of the 1938 hit Algiers.[21] Although an initial filming date was selected for April 10, 1942, delays led to a start of production on May 25.[22] Filming was completed on August 3, and the production cost $1,039,000 ($75,000 over budget),[23] above average for the time.[24] The film was shot in sequence, mainly because only the first half of the script was ready when filming began.[25]The entire picture was shot in the studio, except for the sequence showing Major Strasser's arrival, which was filmed at Van Nuys Airport, and a few short clips of stock footage views of Paris.[26] The street used for the exterior shots had recently been built for another film, The Desert Song,[27] and redressed for the Paris flashbacks. It remained on the Warners backlot until the 1960s. The set for Rick's was built in three unconnected parts, so the internal layout of the building is indeterminate. In a number of scenes, the camera looks through a wall from the cafe area into Rick's office. The background of the final scene, which shows a Lockheed Model 12 Electra Junior airplane with personnel walking around it, was staged using midget extras and a proportionate cardboard plane.[28] Fog was used to mask the model's unconvincing appearance.[29] Nevertheless, the Disney's Hollywood Studios theme park in Orlando, Florida purchased a Lockheed 12A for its Great Movie Ride attraction, and initially claimed that it was the actual plane used in the film.[30] Film critic Roger Ebert called Hal Wallis the "key creative force" for his attention to the details of production (down to insisting on a real parrot in the Blue Parrot bar).[5]The difference between Bergman's and Bogart's height caused some problems. She was some twoinches (5cm) taller than Bogart, and claimed Curtiz had Bogart stand on blocks or sit on cushions in their scenes together.[31]Later, there were plans for a further scene, showing Rick, Renault and a detachment of Free French soldiers on a ship, to incorporate the Allies' 1942 invasion of North Africa; however, it proved too difficult to get Claude Rains for the shoot, and the scene was finally abandoned after David O. Selznick judged "it would be a terrible mistake to change the ending."[32]The original play was inspired by a trip to Europe made by Murray Burnett in 1938, during which he visited Vienna shortly after the Anschluss, where he saw discrimination by Nazis first-hand. In the south of France, he came across a nightclub, which had a multinational clientele and the prototype of Sam, the black piano player.[33][34] In the play, the Ilsa character was an American named Lois Meredith and did not meet Laszlo until after her relationship with Rick in Paris had ended; Rick was a lawyer. To make Rick's motivation more believable, Wallis, Curtiz, and the screenwriters decided to set the film before the attack on Pearl Harbor.[35]The first writers assigned to the script were the Epstein twins, Julius and Philip who, against the wishes of Warner Brothers, left the project after the attack on Pearl Harbor to work with Frank Capra on the Why We Fight series in Washington, D.C.[36] While they were gone, the other credited writer, Howard Koch was assigned to the script and produced some thirty to forty pages.[36] When the Epstein brothers returned after a month, they were reassigned to Casablanca andcontrary to what Koch claimed in two published bookshis work was not used.[36] In the final Warner Brothers budget for the film, the Epsteins were paid $30,416 and Koch $4,200.[37]The uncredited Casey Robinson assisted with three weeks of rewrites, including contributing the series of meetings between Rick and Ilsa in the cafe.[38][39] Koch highlighted the political and melodramatic elements,[40][41] while Curtiz seems to have favored the romantic parts, insisting on retaining the Paris flashbacks.[42] Wallis wrote the final line ("Louie, I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship.") after shooting had been completed. Bogart had to be called in a month after the end of filming to dub it.[42] Despite the many writers, the film has what Ebert describes as a "wonderfully unified and consistent" script. Koch later claimed it was the tension between his own approach and Curtiz's which accounted for this: "Surprisingly, these disparate approaches somehow meshed, and perhaps it was partly this tug of war between Curtiz and me that gave the film a certain balance."[43] Julius Epstein would later note the screenplay contained "more corn than in the states of Kansas and Iowa combined. But when corn works, there's nothing better."[44]The film ran into some trouble from Joseph Breen of the Production Code Administration (the Hollywood self-censorship body), who opposed the suggestions that Captain Renault extorted sexual favors from his supplicants, and that Rick and Ilsa had slept together in Paris.[45] Extensive changes were made, with several lines of dialogue removed and/or altered, and all direct references to sex in the film removed. Additionally, when Sam played "As Time Goes By" in the original script, Rick had remarked "What the  are you playing?"[46] This line implying a curse word was removed at the behest of the Hays Office, and both Renault's selling of visas for sex, and Rick and Ilsa's previous sexual relationship were implied elliptically rather than referenced explicitly.[47]Wallis' first choice for director was William Wyler, but he was unavailable, so Wallis turned to his close friend Michael Curtiz.[48] Curtiz was a Hungarian Jewish migr; he had come to the U.S. in the 1920s, but some of his family were refugees from Nazi Europe. Roger Ebert has commented that in Casablanca "very few shots... are memorable as shots," Curtiz being concerned to use images to tell the story rather than for their own sake.[5] However, he had relatively little input into the development of the plot: Casey Robinson said Curtiz "knew nothing whatever about story...he saw it in pictures, and you supplied the stories."[49] Critic Andrew Sarris called the film "the most decisive exception to the auteur theory",[50] of which Sarris was the most prominent proponent in the United States, to which Aljean Harmetz responded, "nearly every Warner Bros. picture was an exception to the auteur theory".[48] Other critics give more credit to Curtiz; Sidney Rosenzweig, in his study of the director's work, sees the film as a typical example of Curtiz's highlighting of moral dilemmas.[51]The second unit montages, such as the opening sequence of the refugee trail and that showing the invasion of France, were directed by Don Siegel.[52]The cinematographer was Arthur Edeson, a veteran who had previously shot The Maltese Falcon and Frankenstein. Particular attention was paid to photographing Bergman. She was shot mainly from her preferred left side, often with a softening gauze filter and with catch lights to make her eyes sparkle; the whole effect was designed to make her face seem "ineffably sad and tender and nostalgic".[5] Bars of shadow across the characters and in the background variously imply imprisonment, the crucifix, the symbol of the Free French Forces and emotional turmoil.[5] Dark film noir and expressionist lighting is used in several scenes, particularly towards the end of the picture. Rosenzweig argues these shadow and lighting effects are classic elements of the Curtiz style, along with the fluid camera work and the use of the environment as a framing device.[53]The music was written by Max Steiner, who was best known for the score for Gone with the Wind. The song "As Time Goes By" by Herman Hupfeld had been part of the story from the original play; Steiner wanted to write his own composition to replace it, but Bergman had already cut her hair short for her next role (Mara in For Whom the Bell Tolls) and could not re-shoot the scenes which incorporated the song,[54] so Steiner based the entire score on it and "La Marseillaise", the French national anthem, transforming them to reflect changing moods.[55]Particularly notable is the "duel of the songs" between Strasser and Laszlo at Rick's cafe. In the soundtrack, "La Marseillaise" is played by a full orchestra. Originally, the opposing piece for this iconic sequence was to be the "Horst Wessel Lied", a Nazi anthem, but this was still under international copyright in non-Allied countries. Instead "Die Wacht am Rhein" was used. The opening bars of the "Deutschlandlied", the national anthem of Germany, is featured throughout the score as a motif to represent the Germans, much as "La Marseillaise" is used to represent the Allies.Other songs in the film include "It Had to Be You" from 1924 (music by Isham Jones, lyrics by Gus Kahn), "Shine" from 1910 (music by Ford Dabney, lyrics by Cecil Mack and Lew Brown), "Avalon" from 1920 (music and lyrics by Al Jolson, Buddy DeSylva and Vincent Rose), "Perfidia" by Alberto Dominguez, "The Very Thought of You" by Ray Noble, and "Knock on Wood" (music by M.K. Jerome, lyrics by Jack Scholl), the only original song in the film.Although an initial release date was anticipated for spring 1943,[56] the film premiered at the Hollywood Theater in New York City on November 26, 1942, to coincide with the Allied invasion of North Africa and the capture of Casablanca.[2][57] In the 1,500-seat theater, the film grossed $255,000 over ten weeks.[58] It went into general release on January 23, 1943, to take advantage of the Casablanca conference, a high-level meeting between Churchill and Roosevelt in the city. It was a substantial but not spectacular box-office success, taking $3.7 million on its initial U.S. release, making it the seventh best-selling film of 1943.[58][59] The Office of War Information prevented screening of the film to troops in North Africa, believing it would cause resentment among Vichy supporters in the region.[60]Casablanca received "consistently good reviews".[61] Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote, "The Warners... have a picture which makes the spine tingle and the heart take a leap." The newspaper applauded the combination of "sentiment, humor and pathos with taut melodrama and bristling intrigue". While he noted its "devious convolutions of the plot", he praised the screenplay quality as "of the best" and the cast's performances as "all of the first order".[62]The trade paper Variety commended the film's "combination of fine performances, engrossing story and neat direction" and the "variety of moods, action, suspense, comedy and drama that makes Casablanca an A-1 entry at the b.o."[63] "Film is splendid anti-Axis propaganda, particularly inasmuch as the propaganda is strictly a by-product of the principal action and contributes to it instead of getting in the way."[63] The review also applauded the performances of Bergman and Henreid and note that "Bogart, as might be expected, is more at ease as the bitter and cynical operator of a joint than as a lover, but handles both assignments with superb finesse."[63]Some other reviews were less enthusiastic. The New Yorker rated it only "pretty tolerable".[64]The film has grown in popularity. Murray Burnett called it "true yesterday, true today, true tomorrow".[65] By 1955, the film had brought in $6.8 million, making it only the third most successful of Warners' wartime movies (behind Shine On, Harvest Moon and This is the Army).[66] On April 21, 1957, the Brattle Theater of Cambridge, Massachusetts, showed the film as part of a season of old movies. It was so popular that it began a tradition of screening Casablanca during the week of final exams at Harvard University which continues to the present day, and is emulated by many colleges across the United States. Todd Gitlin, a professor of sociology who himself attended one of these screenings, had said that the experience was, "the acting out of my own personal rite of passage".[67] The tradition helped the movie remain popular while other famous films of the 1940s have faded away, and by 1977, Casablanca was the most frequently broadcast film on American television.[68]On the film's 50th anniversary, the Los Angeles Times called Casablanca's great strength "the purity of its Golden Age Hollywoodness [and] the enduring craftsmanship of its resonantly hokey dialogue". The newspaper believed the film achieved a "near-perfect entertainment balance" of comedy, romance, and suspense.[69]According to Roger Ebert, Casablanca is "probably on more lists of the greatest films of all time than any other single title, including Citizen Kane" because of its wider appeal. Ebert opined that Citizen Kane is generally considered to be a "greater" film but Casablanca is more loved.[5] Ebert said that he has never heard of a negative review of the film, even though individual elements can be criticized, citing unrealistic special effects and the stiff character/portrayal of Laszlo.[49] Rudy Behlmer emphasized the variety in the picture: "it's a blend of drama, melodrama, comedy [and] intrigue".[49]Ebert has said that the film is popular because "the people in it are all so good" and that it is "a wonderful gem".[5] As the Resistance hero, Laszlo is ostensibly the most noble, although he is so stiff that he is hard to like.[5] The other characters, in Behlmer's words, are "not cut and dried": they come into their goodness in the course of the film. Renault begins the film as a collaborator with the Nazis, who extorts sexual favors from refugees and has Ugarte killed. Rick, according to Behlmer, is "not a hero,... not a bad guy": he does what is necessary to get along with the authorities and "sticks his neck out for nobody". Even Ilsa, the least active of the main characters, is "caught in the emotional struggle" over which man she really loves. By the end of the film, however, "everybody is sacrificing."[49]There are a few dissenting reviewers. According to Pauline Kael, "It's far from a great film, but it has a special appealingly schlocky romanticism..."[70] Umberto Eco wrote that "by any strict critical standards... Casablanca is a very mediocre film." He viewed the changes the characters undergo as inconsistent rather than complex: "It is a comic strip, a hotch-potch, low on psychological credibility, and with little continuity in its dramatic effects."[71]There is anecdotal evidence that Casablanca may have made a deeper impression among film-lovers than within the professional movie-making establishment. In the November/December 1982 issue of American Film, Chuck Ross claimed that he retyped the screenplay to Casablanca, only changing the title back to Everybody Comes to Rick's and the name of the piano player to Dooley Wilson, and submitted it to 217 agencies. Eighty-five of them read it; of those, thirty-eight rejected it outright, thirty-three generally recognized it (but only eight specifically as Casablanca), three declared it commercially viable, and one suggested turning it into a novel.[72]Hugh Hefner cited it as part of his motivation to open up the Playboy Club.[73]Many subsequent films have drawn on elements of Casablanca. Passage to Marseille reunited Bogart, Rains, Curtiz, Greenstreet and Lorre in 1944, while there are many similarities between Casablanca and two later Bogart films, To Have and Have Not (1944) and Sirocco (1951). Parodies have included the Marx Brothers' A Night in Casablanca (1946), Neil Simon's The Cheap Detective (1978), and Out Cold (2001), while it provided the title for the 1995 hit The Usual Suspects. Woody Allen's Play It Again, Sam (1972) appropriated Bogart's Casablanca persona as the fantasy mentor for Allen's nebbishy character, featuring actor Jerry Lacy in the role of Bogart.Casablanca itself was a plot device in the science-fiction television movie Overdrawn at the Memory Bank (1983), based on John Varley's story, and made a similar, though much less pivotal, appearance in Terry Gilliam's dystopian Brazil (1985). Warner Bros. produced its own parody of the film in the homage Carrotblanca, a 1995 Bugs Bunny cartoon.[74] In Casablanca, a novella by Argentine writer Edgar Brau, the protagonist somehow wanders into Rick's Caf Americain and listens to a strange tale related by Sam.[75]Casablanca has been subjected to many different readings. Semioticians account for the film's popularity by claiming that its inclusion of a whole series of stereotypes paradoxically strengthens the film.[76][77][78][79] Umberto Eco explained:Eco also singled out sacrifice as one of the film's key themes: "the myth of sacrifice runs through the whole film."[82] It was this theme which resonated with a wartime audience that was reassured by the idea that painful sacrifice and going off to war could be romantic gestures done for the greater good.[83]Koch also considered the film a political allegory. Rick is compared to President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who gambled "on the odds of going to war until circumstance and his own submerged nobility force him to close his casino (partisan politics) and commit himselffirst by financing the Side of Right and then by fighting for it."[84] The connection is reinforced by the film's title, which means "white house".[84]Harvey Greenberg presents a Freudian reading in his The Movies on Your Mind, in which the transgressions which prevent Rick from returning to the U.S. constitute an Oedipus complex, which is resolved only when Rick begins to identify with the father figure of Laszlo and the cause which he represents.[85] Sidney Rosenzweig argues that such readings are reductive, and that the most important aspect of the film is its ambiguity, above all in the central character of Rick; he cites the different names which each character gives Rick (Richard, Ricky, Mr. Rick, Herr Blaine and so on) as evidence of the different meanings which he has for each person.[86]Because of its November 1942 release, the New York Film Critics decided to include the film in its 1942 award season for best picture. Casablanca lost to In Which We Serve.[58] However, the Academy stated that since the film went into national release in the beginning of 1943, it would be included in that year's nominations.[87] Casablanca was nominated for eight Academy Awards, and won three. When the award for Best Picture was announced producer Hal B. Wallis got up to accept, only to find Jack Warner had rushed onstage to take the trophy. Wallis later recalled, "I had no alternative but to sit down again, humiliated and furious. ... Almost forty years later, I still haven't recovered from the shock."[88] This incident would lead Wallis to leave Warner Bros. in April.[89]In 1989, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 2005, it was named one of the 100 greatest films of the last 80 years by Time.com (the selected films were not ranked). The famed teacher of screenwriting, Robert McKee, maintains that the script is "the greatest screenplay of all time".[6] In 2006, the Writers Guild of America, west agreed, voting it the best ever in its list of the 101 greatest screenplays.[90] The film has been selected by the American Film Institute for many of their lists.Casablanca was initially released on Betamax and VHS by Magnetic Video and later by CBS/Fox Video (as United Artists owned the rights at the time). It was next released on laserdisc in 1991, and on VHS in 1992both from MGM/UA Home Entertainment (distributing for Turner Entertainment), which at the time was distributed by Warner Home Video. It was first released on DVD in 1997 by MGM, containing the trailer and a making-of featurette (Warner Home Video reissued the DVD in 2000). A subsequent two-disc special edition, containing audio commentaries, documentaries, and a newly remastered visual and audio presentation, was released in 2003.[91]An HD DVD was released on November 14, 2006, containing the same special features as the 2003 DVD.[92] Reviewers were impressed with the new high-definition transfer of the film.[93][94]A Blu-ray release with new special features came out on December 2, 2008; it is also available on DVD.[95] The Blu-ray was initially only released as an expensive gift set with a booklet, a luggage tag and other assorted gift-type items. It was eventually released as a stand-alone Blu-ray in September 2009. Warner Bros put the film into moratorium in 2011 for an eventual re-release in 2012.[96] On March 27, 2012, Warner released a new 70th Anniversary Ultimate Collector's Edition Blu-ray/DVD combo set. It includes a brand-new 4K restoration and new bonus material.[97][98]Almost from the moment Casablanca became a hit, talk began of producing a sequel. One titled Brazzaville (in the final scene, Renault recommends fleeing to that Free French-held city) was planned, but never produced.[99] Since then, no studio has seriously considered filming a sequel or outright remake. Franois Truffaut refused an invitation to remake the film in 1974, citing its cult status among American students as his reason.[100] Attempts to recapture the magic of Casablanca in other settings, such as Caboblanco (1980), "a South American-set retooling of Casablanca",[101] Havana (1990),[102] and Barb Wire (1996), set in 2017, have been poorly received.The novel As Time Goes By, written by Michael Walsh and published in 1998, was authorized by Warner.[103][104] The novel picks up where the film leaves off, and also tells of Rick's mysterious past in America. The book met with little success.[105] David Thomson provided an unofficial sequel in his 1985 novel Suspects.There have been two short-lived television series based upon Casablanca, both considered prequels. The first aired from 1955 to 1956, with Charles McGraw as Rick and Marcel Dalio, who played Emil the croupier in the movie, as Renault; it aired on ABC as part of the wheel series Warner Bros. Presents.[106] It produced a total of ten hour-long episodes. Another, briefly broadcast on NBC in 1983, starred David Soul as Rick, Ray Liotta as Sacha, and Scatman Crothers as a somewhat elderly Sam.[107] A total of five hour-long episodes were produced.There were several radio adaptations of the film. The two best-known were a thirty-minute adaptation on The Screen Guild Theater on April 26, 1943, starring Bogart, Bergman, and Henreid, and an hour-long version on the Lux Radio Theater on January 24, 1944, featuring Alan Ladd as Rick, Hedy Lamarr as Ilsa, and John Loder as Victor Laszlo. Two other thirty-minute adaptations were aired: on Philip Morris Playhouse on September 3, 1943, and on Theater of Romance on December 19, 1944, in which Dooley Wilson reprised his role as Sam.Julius Epstein made two attempts to turn the film into a Broadway musical, in 1951 and 1967, but neither made it to the stage.[108] The original play, Everybody Comes to Rick's, was produced in Newport, Rhode Island, in August 1946, and again in London in April 1991, but met with no success.[109] The film was adapted into a musical by the Takarazuka Revue, an all-female Japanese musical theater company, and ran from November 2009 through February 2010.[110]Casablanca was part of the film colorization controversy of the 1980s,[111] when a colorized version aired on the television station WTBS. In 1984, MGM-UA hired Color Systems Technology to colorize the film for $180,000.[112] When Ted Turner of Turner Entertainment purchased MGM-UA's film library two years later, he canceled the request, before contracting American Film Technologies (AFT) in 1988. AFT completed the colorization in two months at a cost of $450,000.[112] Turner later reacted to the criticism of the colorization, saying, "[Casablanca] is one of a handful of films that really doesn't have to be colorized. I did it because I wanted to. All I'm trying to do is protect my investment."[112]The Library of Congress deemed that the color change differed so much from the original film that it gave a new copyright to Turner Entertainment. When the colorized film debuted on WTBS, it was watched by three million viewers, not making the top-ten viewed cable shows for the week. Although Jack Matthews of the Los Angeles Times called the finished product "state of the art", it was mostly met with negative critical reception.[112] It was briefly available on home video. Gary Edgerton, writing for the Journal of Popular Film & Television criticized the colorization, "... Casablanca in color ended up being much blander in appearance and, overall, much less visually interesting than its 1942 predecessor."[112] Bogart's son Stephen said, "if you're going to colorize Casablanca, why not put arms on the Venus de Milo?"[100]Several rumors and misconceptions have grown up around the film, one being that Ronald Reagan was originally chosen to play Rick. This originates in a press release issued by the studio early on in the film's development, but by that time the studio already knew that he was due to go work for the army, and he was never seriously considered.[113] George Raft claimed that he had turned down the lead role. Studio records make clear, however, that Wallis was committed to Bogart from the start.[114]Another well-known story is that the actors did not know until the last day of shooting how the film was to end. The original play (set entirely in the cafe) ended with Rick sending Ilsa and Victor to the airport. During scriptwriting, the possibility was discussed of Laszlo being killed in Casablanca, allowing Rick and Ilsa to leave together, but as Casey Robinson wrote to Hal Wallis before filming began, the ending of the film "set up for a swell twist when Rick sends her away on the plane with Victor. For now, in doing so, he is not just solving a love triangle. He is forcing the girl to live up to the idealism of her nature, forcing her to carry on with the work that in these days is far more important than the love of two little people."[115] It was certainly impossible for Ilsa to leave Laszlo for Rick, as the production code forbade showing a woman leaving her husband for another man. The concern was not whether Ilsa would leave with Laszlo, but how this result could be engineered.[116] The problem was solved when the Epstein brothers, Julius and Philip, were driving down Sunset Boulevard and stopped for the light at Beverly Glen. At that instant the identical twins turned to each other and simultaneously cried out, "Round up the usual suspects!"[117] By the time they had driven past Fairfax and the Cahuenga Pass and through the Warner Brothers studio's portals at Burbank, in the words of Julius Epstein, "the idea for the farewell scene between a tearful Bergman and a suddenly noble Bogart" had been formed and all the problems of the ending had been solved.[118]The confusion was probably caused by Bergman's later statement that she did not know which man she was meant to be in love with. While rewrites did occur during the filming, Aljean Harmetz's examination of the scripts has shown that many of the key scenes were shot after Bergman knew how the film would end: any confusion was, in Ebert's words, "emotional", not "factual".[5]The film has several logical flaws, the foremost being the two "letters of transit" which enable their bearers to leave Vichy French territory. According to the audio(helpinfo), Ugarte says the letters had been signed by (depending on the listener) either Free French General Charles de Gaulle or Vichy General Maxime Weygand. The English subtitles on the official DVD read de Gaulle, while the French subtitles specify Weygand. Weygand had been the Vichy Delegate-General for the North African colonies until a month before the film is set (and a year after it was written). De Gaulle was the head of the Free French government in exile. A Vichy court martial had convicted de Gaulle of treason in absentia and sentenced him to life imprisonment on August 2, 1940, so a letter signed by him would have been of no benefit.[23] A classic MacGuffin, the letters were invented by Joan Allison for the original play and never questioned.[119] Even in the film, Rick suggests to Renault that the letters would not have allowed Ilsa to escape, let alone Laszlo: "People have been held in Casablanca in spite of their legal rights."In the same vein, though Laszlo asserts that the Nazis cannot arrest him as "This is still unoccupied France; any violation of neutrality would reflect on Captain Renault," Ebert points out that "It makes no sense that he could walk around freely....He would be arrested on sight."[5] Harmetz, however, suggests that Strasser intentionally allows Laszlo to move about, hoping that he will tell them the names of Resistance leaders in occupied Europe in exchange for Ilsa being allowed to leave for Lisbon.Other mistakes include the wrong version of the flag for French Morocco and the fact no uniformed German troops ever set foot in Casablanca during the Second World War.[23]According to Harmetz, in reality few of the refugees depicted would actually have gone to Casablanca.[120] The usual route out of Germany was through Vienna, Prague, Paris, and London, although the film's technical advisor, Robert Aisner, did follow the path to Morocco given in Casablanca's opening scene.One of the lines most closely associated with the film"Play it again, Sam"is a misquotation.[121][122] When Ilsa first enters the Caf Americain, she spots Sam and asks him to "Play it once, Sam, for old times' sake." After he feigns ignorance, she responds, "Play it, Sam. Play 'As Time Goes By'." Later that night, alone with Sam, Rick says, "You played it for her, you can play it for me," and "If she can stand it, I can! Play it!"Rick's toast to Ilsa, "Here's looking at you, kid", used several times, is not in the draft screenplays, but has been attributed to something Bogart said to Bergman as he taught her poker between takes.[123] It was voted the 5th most memorable line in cinema in AFI's 100 Years100 Movie Quotes by the American Film Institute.[124]Six lines from Casablanca appeared in the AFI list, the most of any film (Gone with the Wind and The Wizard of Oz tied for second with three apiece). The other five are:Streaming audio         November 26, 1942(1942-11-26) (premiere)January 23, 1943(1943-01-23) (general release)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Writing
3.2 Direction
3.3 Cinematography
3.4 Music

3.1 Writing3.2 Direction3.3 Cinematography3.4 Music4 Timing of release5 Reception

5.1 Initial response
5.2 Lasting impact
5.3 Influence on later works

5.1 Initial response5.2 Lasting impact5.3 Influence on later works6 Interpretation7 Accolades8 Home media releases9 Sequels and other versions

9.1 Colorization

9.1 Colorization10 Rumors11 Errors and inaccuracies12 Quotations13 See also14 References

14.1 Notes
14.2 Bibliography

14.1 Notes14.2 Bibliography15 External links3.1 Writing3.2 Direction3.3 Cinematography3.4 Music5.1 Initial response5.2 Lasting impact5.3 Influence on later works9.1 Colorization14.1 Notes14.2 BibliographyHumphrey Bogart as Rick Blaine. Earlier in his career, he had been typecast as a gangster. High Sierra (1941) had allowed him to play a character with some warmth, but Rick was his first truly romantic role.Ingrid Bergman as Ilsa Lund. Bergman's official website calls Ilsa her "most famous and enduring role".[4] The Swedish actress's Hollywood debut in Intermezzo had been well received, but her subsequent films were not major successesuntil Casablanca. Film critic Roger Ebert calls her "luminous", and comments on the chemistry between her and Bogart: "she paints his face with her eyes".[5] Other actresses considered for the role of Ilsa included Ann Sheridan, Hedy Lamarr and Michle Morgan. Wallis obtained the services of Bergman, who was contracted to David O. Selznick, by lending Olivia de Havilland in exchange.[6]Paul Henreid as Victor Laszlo. Henreid, an Austrian actor who emigrated in 1935, was reluctant to take the role (it "set [him] as a stiff forever", according to Pauline Kael[7]), until he was promised top billing along with Bogart and Bergman. Henreid did not get on well with his fellow actors; he considered Bogart "a mediocre actor", while Bergman called Henreid a "prima donna".[8]Claude Rains as Captain Louis Renault. Rains was an English actor born in London. He had previously worked with Michael Curtiz on The Adventures of Robin Hood. He later appeared in Alfred Hitchcock's Notorious with Ingrid Bergman.Conrad Veidt as Major Heinrich Strasser. He was a German actor who had appeared in The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari before fleeing from the Nazis and ironically was best known for playing Nazis in U.S. films.Sydney Greenstreet as Signor Ferrari, a rival nightclub owner. Another Englishman, Greenstreet had previously starred with Lorre and Bogart in his film debut in The Maltese Falcon.Peter Lorre as Signor Ugarte. Lorre, who was born in Austria-Hungary, had left Germany in 1933.Curt Bois as the pickpocket. Bois was a German Jewish actor and another refugee. He had one of the longest careers in film, making his first appearance in 1907 and his last in 1987.Leonid Kinskey as Sascha, the Russian bartender infatuated with Yvonne. He was actually born in Russia.Madeleine LeBeau as Yvonne, Rick's soon-discarded girlfriend. The French actress was Marcel Dalio's wife until their divorce in 1942.Joy Page as Annina Brandel, the young Bulgarian refugee. The third credited American, she was studio head Jack Warner's stepdaughter.John Qualen as Berger, Laszlo's Resistance contact. He was born in Canada, but grew up in America. He appeared in many of John Ford's movies.S. Z. Sakall (credited as S. K. Sakall) as Carl, the waiter. He was a Hungarian actor who fled from Germany in 1939. His three sisters later died in a concentration camp.Dooley Wilson as Sam. He was one of the few American members of the cast. A drummer, he could not play the piano. Hal Wallis had considered changing Sam to a female character (Hazel Scott and Ella Fitzgerald were candidates), and even after shooting had been completed, Wallis considered dubbing over Wilson's voice for the songs.[9][10]Leon Belasco as a dealer in Rick's Cafe. A Russian-American character actor, he appeared in 13 films the year Casablanca was released.[11]Marcel Dalio as Emil the croupier. He had been a star in French cinema, appearing in Jean Renoir's La Grande Illusion and La Regle de Jeu, but after he fled the fall of France, he was reduced to bit parts in Hollywood. He had a key role in another of Bogart's films, To Have and Have Not.Helmut Dantine as Jan Brandel, the Bulgarian roulette player married to Annina Brandel. Another Austrian, he had spent time in a concentration camp after the Anschluss, the annexation of Austria.William Edmunds as a contact man at Rick's. He usually played characters with heavy accents, such as Martini in It's a Wonderful Life (1946).Gregory Gaye as the German banker who is refused entry to the casino by Rick. Gaye was a Russian-born actor who went to the United States in 1917 after the Russian Revolution.Torben Meyer as the Dutch banker who runs "the second largest banking house in Amsterdam". Meyer was a Danish actor.George London sings the Marseillaise. London was a Los Angeles born bass-baritone opera singer.Georges Renavent as Conspirator.Dan Seymour as Abdul the doorman. He was an American actor who, at 265 pounds, often played villains, including the principal one in To Have and Have Not, and one of the secondary ones in Key Largo, both opposite Bogart.Norma Varden as the Englishwoman whose husband has his wallet stolen. She was a famous English character actress.Jean Del Val as the French police radio announcer who (following the opening montage sequence) reports the news of the murder of the two German couriers.Leo White as the waiter Emile (not to be confused with the croupier Emil), from whom Renault orders a drink when he sits down with the Laszlos. White was a familiar face in many Charlie Chaplin two-reelers in the 1910s, usually playing an upper-class antagonist.Jack Benny may have had an unbilled cameo role (claimed by a contemporary newspaper advertisement[12] and reportedly in the Casablanca press book[13]). When asked in his column "Movie Answer Man", critic Roger Ebert first replied, "It looks something like him. That's all I can say."[13] In response to a follow-up question in his next column, he stated, "I think you're right."[14]Louis V. Arco as another refugee in Rick's. Born Lutz Altschul in Austria, he moved to America shortly after the Anschluss and changed his name.Trude Berliner as a baccarat player in Rick's. Born in Berlin, she was a famous cabaret performer and film actress. Being Jewish, she left Germany in 1933.Ilka Grnig as Mrs. Leuchtag. Born in Vienna, she was a silent movie star in Germany who came to America after the Anschluss.Lotte Palfi as the refugee trying to sell her diamonds. Born in Germany, she played stage roles at a prestigious theater in Darmstadt, Germany. She journeyed to America after the Nazis came to power in 1933. She later married another Casablanca actor, Wolfgang Zilzer.Richard Ryen as Strasser's aide, Captain Heinze. The Austrian Jew acted in German films, but fled the Nazis.Ludwig Stssel as Mr. Leuchtag, the German refugee whose English is "not so good". Born in Austria, the Jewish actor was imprisoned following the Anschluss, the annexation of Austria. When he was released, he left for England and then America. Stssel became famous for doing a long series of commercials for Italian Swiss Colony wine producers. Dressed in an Alpine hat and lederhosen, Stssel was their spokesman with the slogan, "That Little Old Winemaker, Me!"Hans Twardowski as a Nazi officer who argues with a French officer over Yvonne. He was born in Stettin, Germany (now Szczecin, Poland).Wolfgang Zilzer as a Free French agent who is shot in the opening scene of the movie, was a silent movie actor in Germany who left when the Nazis took over. He later married Casablanca actress Lotte Palfi."Louis, I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship"20th"Play it, Sam. Play 'As Time Goes By'"28th"Round up the usual suspects"32nd"We'll always have Paris"43rd"Of all the gin joints in all the towns in all the world, she walks into mine"67thUnited StatesportalFilmportalWorld War IIportalBehlmer, Rudy (1985). Inside Warner Bros. (19351951). London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson. ISBN0-297-79242-3.Casablanca (Two-Disc Special Edition DVD) (2003) (with audio commentaries by Roger Ebert and Rudy Behlmer and documentary Casablanca 50th Anniversary Special: You Must Remember This, narrated by Lauren Bacall).Epstein, Julius J. (1994). Casablanca. Imprenta Glorias: Fifty Copies Conceived and Illustrated by Gloria Naylor.Francisco, Charles (1980). You Must Remember This: The Filming of Casablanca. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. ISBN0-13-977058-5.Gardner, Gerald (1988). The Censorship Papers: Movie Censorship Letters from the Hays Office, 1934 to 1968. New York: Dodd Mead. ISBN0-396-08903-8.Harmetz, Aljean (1992). Round Up the Usual Suspects: The Making of CasablancaBogart, Bergman, and World War II. Hyperion. ISBN1-56282-761-8.Koch, Howard (1973). Casablanca: Script and Legend. The Overlook Press. ISBN0-87951-006-4.Lebo, Harlan (1992). Casablanca: Behind the Scenes. Fireside. ISBN0-671-76981-2.McGilligan, Pat (1986). Backstory: Interviews with Screenwriters of Hollywood's Golden Age. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN0-520-05666-3.Miller, Frank (1992). Casablanca  As Times Goes By: 50th Anniversary Commemorative. Turner Publishing Inc. ISBN1-878685-14-7.Robertson, James C. (1993). The Casablanca Man: The Cinema of Michael Curtiz London:Routledge. ISBN 0-415-06804-5Rosenzweig, Sidney (1982). Casablanca and Other Major Films of Michael Curtiz. Ann Arbor, Mich.: UMI Research Press. ISBN 0-8357-1304-0P.O.V. Number 14, December 2002 (pdf)  issue of a film studies journal that is entirely devoted to CasablancaCasablanca at the Internet Movie DatabaseCasablanca at the TCM Movie DatabaseCasablanca at AllRoviCasablanca at Rotten TomatoesCasablanca at Box Office MojoCasablanca on Screen Guild Theater: April 26, 1943Casablanca on Lux Radio Theater: January 24, 1944Casablanca on Theater of Romance: December 19, 1944The Godfather is a 1972 American epic crime film directed by Francis Ford Coppola and produced by Albert S. Ruddy from a screenplay by Mario Puzo and Coppola. Based on Puzo's 1969 novel of the same name, the film stars Marlon Brando and Al Pacino as the leaders of a powerful New York crime family. The story, spanning the years 1945 to 1955, centers on the ascension of Michael Corleone (Pacino) from reluctant family outsider to ruthless Mafia boss while also chronicling the Corleone family under the patriarch Vito Corleone (Brando).The Godfather is widely regarded as one of the greatest films in world cinema[3] and as one of the most influential, especially in the gangster genre.[4] Now ranked as the second greatest film in American cinema (behind Citizen Kane) by the American Film Institute,[5] it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry in 1990.[6] The film's success spawned two sequels: The Godfather Part II in 1974, and The Godfather Part III in 1990.The film was for a time the highest grossing picture ever made, and remains the box office leader for 1972. It won three Oscars that year: for Best Picture, for Best Actor (Brando) and in the category Best Adapted Screenplay for Puzo and Coppola. Its nominations in seven other categories included Pacino, James Caan and Robert Duvall for Best Supporting Actor and Coppola for Best Director.On the day of his only daughter's wedding, Vito Corleone (Marlon Brando) hears requests in his role as the Godfather, the Don of a New York crime family. Vito's youngest son, Michael (Al Pacino), in Marine Corps khakis, introduces his girlfriend, Kay Adams (Diane Keaton), to his family at the sprawling reception. Vito's godson Johnny Fontane (Al Martino), a popular singer, pleads for help in securing a coveted movie role, so Vito dispatches his consigliere, Tom Hagen (Robert Duvall), to the abrasive studio head, Jack Woltz (John Marley), to secure the casting. Woltz is unmoved until the morning he wakes up in bed with the severed head of his prized stallion.Shortly before Christmas 1945, drug baron Virgil "The Turk" Sollozzo (Al Lettieri), backed by the Corleones' rivals, the Tattaglias, asks Vito for investment and protection through his political connections, but Vito disapproves of drug dealers. Instead, he sends his enforcer, Luca Brasi (Lenny Montana) to spy on them, but two fish are sent to the family wrapped in Brasi's vest, confirming he "sleeps with the fishes". An assassination attempt by Sollozzo's men lands Vito in the hospital, so eldest son, Sonny (James Caan), takes command. Sollozzo kidnaps Hagen to pressure Sonny to accept his deal. Michael thwarts a second assassination attempt on his father at the hospital, but is accosted by corrupt police captain McCluskey (Sterling Hayden), who breaks his jaw. Sonny retaliates by having Tattaglia's son killed. Michael comes up with a plan to hit Sollozzo and McCluskey that his brother approves over Hagen's objections: on the pretext of settling the dispute, Michael lures the pair to a restaurant, retrieves a planted handgun and murders them.Despite a clampdown from the authorities, the Five Families erupt in open warfare and the brothers fear for their safety. Michael takes refuge in Sicily, and Fredo (John Cazale) is sheltered by associate Moe Greene (Alex Rocco) in Las Vegas. Sonny attacks his brother-in-law Carlo on the street for abusing his sister Connie (Talia Shire). When it happens again, Sonny speeds for her home but assassins ambush him at a highway toll booth and riddle him with machine gun fire.Vito is saddened to learn that, despite his hopes, Michael has become involved in the family business. However, Michael has fallen in love with Apollonia Vitelli (Simonetta Stefanelli) and married her in Sicily. His peace is shattered when a car bomb intended for him takes the life of his new wife.To end the feuds, Vito meets with the heads of the Five Families, withdrawing his opposition to the Tattaglias' heroin business and swearing to forgo revenge for Sonny's murder. He deduces that the Tattaglias were under orders of the now dominant Don Emilio Barzini (Richard Conte). With his safety guaranteed, Michael returns home and over a year later marries Kay. Seeing his father at the end of his career and his surviving brother too weak, Michael takes the reins of the family and promises his wife to make it legitimate within five years.Biding his time, Michael allows rival families to pressure Corleone enterprises and plans to move family operations to Nevada, while delegating New York operations to members who stay behind. Michael also replaces Hagen with his father as his consigliere; Vito explains to an upset Hagen that they have long range plans for him in the family. When Michael travels to Las Vegas to buy out Greene's stake in the family's casinos, Greene derides the Corleones as a fading power. Michael's anger is fueled when Fredo falls under Greene's sway.Vito collapses and dies in his garden in 1955 while playing with Michaels son, Anthony. At the funeral, Salvatore Tessio (Abe Vigoda) arranges a meeting between Michael and Don Barzini, signalling his treachery as Vito had warned. The meeting is set for the same day as the christening of Michael's niece, Mary, to whom he will stand as godfather. As the christening proceeds, Corleone assassins, acting on Michael's orders, murder the other New York dons and Moe Greene. Tessio is told that Michael is aware of his betrayal and taken off to his death. After Carlo is questioned by Michael on his involvement in setting up Sonny's murder and confesses he was contacted by Barzini, Peter Clemenza (Richard S. Castellano) kills him with a garrote wire. Michael is confronted by Connie, who accuses him of having her husband killed. He denies killing Carlo when questioned by Kay, an answer she accepts. As Kay watches warily, Michael receives his capos, who address him as the new Don Corleone.Coppola was not Paramount Pictures' first choice to direct. Italian director Sergio Leone was offered the job first, but he declined in order to direct his own gangster opus, Once Upon a Time in America, which focused on Jewish-American gangsters.[7] Peter Bogdanovich was then approached but he also declined the offer and made What's Up, Doc? instead. According to Robert Evans, head of Paramount at the time, Coppola also did not initially want to direct the film because he feared it would glorify the Mafia and violence, and thus reflect poorly on his Sicilian and Italian heritage; on the other hand, Evans specifically wanted an Italian-American to direct the film because his research had shown that previous films about the Mafia that were directed by non-Italians had fared dismally at the box office, and he wanted to, in his own words, "smell the spaghetti".[8] When Coppola hit upon the idea of making it a metaphor for American capitalism, however, he eagerly agreed to take the helm.[9] At the time, Coppola had directed five feature films, the most notable of which was the adaptation of the stage musical Finian's Rainbow  although he had also received an Academy Award for co-writing Patton in 1970.[10] Coppola was in debt to Warner Bros. for $400,000 following budget overruns on George Lucas's THX 1138, which Coppola had produced, and he took The Godfather on Lucas's advice.[11] Years later, he said that Paramount chose him because he was a young director, turning 31 just a month after shooting began.[12]There was intense friction between Coppola and Paramount, and several times Coppola was almost replaced. As early as the first week, Coppola was nearly fired when Pacino was badly injured, delaying production. Paramount maintains that its skepticism was due to a rocky start to production, though Coppola believes that the first week went extremely well. The studio thought that Coppola failed to stay on schedule, frequently made production and casting errors, and insisted on unnecessary expenses, and two producers unsuccessfully tried to convince another filmmaker to take Coppola's place. The producers scapegoated the other filmmaker when their attempt to fire Coppola became known. Because the producers told him that the other filmmaker had attempted a coup, Coppola says he was shadowed by a replacement director, who was ready to take over if Coppola was fired. Despite such intense pressure, he managed to defend his decisions and avoid being replaced.[12] Coppola would later recollect:[13]The Godfather was a very unappreciated movie when we were making it. They were very unhappy with it. They didn't like the cast. They didn't like the way I was shooting it. I was always on the verge of getting fired. So it was an extremely nightmarish experience. I had two little kids, and the third one was born during that. We lived in a little apartment, and I was basically frightened that they didn't like it. They had as much as said that, so when it was all over I wasn't at all confident that it was going to be successful, and that I'd ever get another job.Paramount was in financial trouble at the time of production and was desperate for a "big hit" to boost business, hence the pressure Coppola faced during filming. They wanted The Godfather to appeal to a wide audience and threatened Coppola with a "violence coach" to make the film more exciting. Coppola added a few more violent scenes to keep the studio happy. The scene in which Connie smashed kitchen dishes after finding out Carlo was cheating was added for this reason.[12]The film was originally budgeted for $2 million, and was scripted as a modern adaptation. However, when Coppola got his hands on the script, he was adamant that it be set in the same time period as the book, from 1945 to 1955. This required a large number of second unit shots, some of which embarrassed Coppola at the time.[12]Screenwriter Robert Towne did uncredited work on the script, in particular the Pacino-Brando tomato garden scene.[14]Coppola's casting choices were unpopular with studio executives at Paramount Pictures, particularly Marlon Brando as Don Vito Corleone. Coppola's first two choices for the role were both Brando and Laurence Olivier, but Olivier's agent refused the role, saying, "Lord Olivier is not taking any jobs. He's very sick. He's gonna die soon and he's not interested" (Olivier lived 18 years after the refusal). Paramount, which wanted Ernest Borgnine, originally refused to allow Coppola to cast Brando in the role, citing difficulties Brando had on recent film sets. One studio executive proposed Danny Thomas for the role citing the fact that Don Corleone was a strong "family man". At one point, Coppola was told by Paramount president Stanley Jaffe that "Marlon Brando will never appear in this motion picture." After pleading with the executives, Coppola was allowed to cast Brando only if he appeared in the film for much less salary than his previous films, perform a screen-test, and put up a bond saying that he would not cause a delay in the production (as he had done on previous film sets).[15] Coppola chose Brando over Borgnine on the basis of his screen test, which also won over the Paramount leadership. Charles Bluhdorn in particular was captivated by Brando's screen test; when he saw it, he exclaimed, "What are we watching? Who is this old guinea?" Brando later won an Academy Award for his portrayal, which he refused to accept in order to call attention to harmful Hollywood stereotypes of Native Americans.[16][17]The studio originally wanted Robert Redford or Ryan O'Neal to play Michael Corleone, but Coppola wanted an unknown who looked like an Italian-American, whom he found in Al Pacino.[12] Pacino was not well known at the time, having appeared in only two minor films, and the studio did not consider him right for the part,[15] in part because of his height. Jack Nicholson, Dustin Hoffman, Warren Beatty, Martin Sheen, and James Caan also auditioned.[15] At one point, Caan was the first choice to play Michael, while Carmine Caridi was signed as elder brother Sonny. Pacino was given the role only after Coppola threatened to quit the production; Caan stated that Coppola envisioned Michael to be the Sicilian-looking one and Sonny was the Americanized version. The studio agreed to Pacino on the condition that Caan was cast as Sonny instead of Caridi, despite the former's Jewish heritage and the latter closely matching the character in the novel (a six-foot-four, black-haired Italian-American bull). Coppola and Puzo would subsequently create a role for Caridi in the sequels.[18]Bruce Dern, Paul Newman, and Steve McQueen were considered for the role of Tom Hagen that eventually went to Robert Duvall. Sylvester Stallone auditioned for Carlo Rizzi and Paulie Gatto, Anthony Perkins for Sonny, and Mia Farrow auditioned for Kay. William Devane was seen for the role of Moe Greene. Mario Adorf was approached for a role as well. A then-unknown Robert De Niro auditioned for the roles of Michael, Sonny, Carlo, and Paulie. He was cast as Paulie, but Coppola arranged a "trade" with The Gang That Couldn't Shoot Straight to get Al Pacino from that film. De Niro later played the young Vito Corleone in Part II, winning an Oscar for Best Supporting Actor for the role.To some extent, the film was a family affair for Francis Ford Coppola. Carmine Coppola, his father, who had a distinguished career as a composer, conductor and arranger, wrote additional music for the film and appeared in a bit part as a piano player, and Carmine's wife, Italia Coppola, was an extra. The director's sister, Talia Shire, was cast as Connie Corleone, and his infant daughter, Sofia, played Connie's and Carlo's newborn son, Michael Francis Rizzi, in the climactic baptism scene near the movie's end.[19] Coppola also cast his sons as Tom Hagen's sons, Frank and Andrew. They are seen in the Sonny-Carlo street fight scene and behind Pacino and Duvall during the funeral scene.Most of the principal photography took place from March 29, 1971 to August 6, 1971, although a scene with Pacino and Keaton was shot in the autumn. There were a total of 77 days of shooting, fewer than the 83 for which the production had budgeted.The opening shot is a long, slow pullback, starting with a close-up of Bonasera, who is petitioning Don Corleone, and ending with the Godfather, seen from behind, framing the picture. This move, which lasts for about three minutes, was shot with a computer-controlled zoom lens designed by Tony Karp.[20]The scene of Michael driving with McCluskey and Sollozzo avoided the cost of back-projection. Instead, technicians moved lights behind the car to create the illusion.The cat in the opening scene used to hang around the studio, and was simply dropped in Brando's lap at the last minute by the director.[21][22]One of the movie's most shocking moments involved the real severed head of a horse. Animal rights groups protested the inclusion of the scene. Coppola later stated that the horse's head was delivered to him from a dog food company; a horse had not been killed specifically for the movie.[12][15]In the novel, Jack Woltz, the movie producer whose horse's head is put in his bed, is also shown to be a pedophile as Tom Hagen sees a young girl (presumably one of Woltz's child stars) crying while walking out of Woltz's room. This scene was cut from the theatrical release but can be found on the DVD (though Woltz can still briefly be seen kissing the girl on the cheek in his studio in the film).The shooting of Moe Greene through the eye was inspired by the death of gangster Bugsy Siegel. To achieve the effect, actor Alex Rocco's glasses had two tubes hidden in their frames. One had fake blood in it, and the other had a BB and compressed air. When the gun was shot, the compressed air shot the BB through the glasses, shattering them from the inside. The other tube then released the fake blood.The equally startling scene of McCluskey's shooting was accomplished by building a fake forehead on top of actor Sterling Hayden. A gap was cut in the center, filled with fake blood, and capped off with a plug of prosthetic flesh. The plug was quickly yanked out with monofilament fishing line, making a bloody hole suddenly appear in Hayden's head.The most complicated filming scene was the death of Sonny Corleone at the Jones Beach Causeway toll plaza midway through the film. Inspired by the final scene in Bonnie and Clyde, James Caan's suit was rigged with 127 squibs of fake blood that exploded in a simulation of multiple sub machine-gun bullet hits.Locations[23] around New York City were used for the film, including the then-closed flagship store of Best & Company on Fifth Avenue, which was dressed up and used for the scene in which Pacino and Keaton are Christmas shopping. At least one location in Los Angeles was used also (for the exterior of Woltz's mansion), for which neither Robert Duvall nor John Marley was available; in some shots, it is possible to see that extras are standing in for the two actors. A scene with Pacino and Keaton was filmed in the town of Ross, California. The Sicilian towns of Savoca and Forza d'Agr outside of Taormina were also used for exterior locations. Interiors were shot at Filmways Studio in New York.[citation needed]A side entrance to Bellevue Hospital was used for Michael's confrontation with police Captain McCluskey.[24] As of 2007, the steps and gate to the hospital were still there but have fallen victim to neglect. The hospital interiors, shown when Michael visits his father there, were filmed at the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary on 14th Street, in Manhattan, New York City.[citation needed]The scene in which Don Barzini is assassinated was filmed on the steps of the New York Supreme Court building on Foley Square in Manhattan, New York City.[25]The wedding scene at the Corleone family compound was shot at 110 Longfellow Avenue in the Todt Hill section of Staten Island. The numerous Tudor homes on the block gave the impression that they were part of the same "compound".[26] Paramount built a Plexiglas "stone wall" which traversed the street  the same wall where Santino smashed the camera. Many of the extras in the wedding scene were local Italian-Americans who were asked by Coppola to drink homemade wine, enjoy the traditional Italian food, and participate in the scene as though it were an actual wedding. Food was catered by Demyan's Hofbrau, a restaurant on Van Duzer Street which is no longer in existence. The wedding cake was prepared by a bakery on Port Richmond Avenue.[citation needed]Two churches were used to film the baptism scene. The interior shots were filmed at Old St. Patrick's Cathedral in New York. For the baptism, Bach's Passacaglia and Fugue in C minor, BWV 582 was used, as were other Bach works for the pipe organ. The exterior scenes following the baptism were filmed at The Church of St. Joachim and St. Anne in the Pleasant Plains section of Staten Island. In 1973, much of the church was destroyed in a fire. Only the faade and steeple of the original church remained, and were later incorporated into a new structure.[citation needed]The funeral scene was filmed at Calvary Cemetery in Woodside, Queens.[27] The toll booth scene was filmed at the site of Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, New York on Long Island, which was under construction at the time. It also utilized the former Mitchel Field, and the roadway used was once a runway.[citation needed]The film's famous score was composed by Nino Rota. Francis Coppola's father Carmine Coppola contributed to the music performed in the film's wedding scene.[28] Later, his son would call on him to compose additional music for the score of The Godfather Part II (1974) and most of the score for The Godfather Part III (1990).The Godfather was a blockbuster, breaking many box office records to become the highest grossing film of 1972. It earned $81.5 million in theatrical rentals in North America during its initial release,[29] increasing its earnings to $85.7 million through a reissue in 1973,[30] and including a limited re-release in 1997 it ultimately earned an equivalent exhibition gross of $135 million.[31] While it displaced Gone with the Wind to become the top rentals earner (a position it would retain until the release of Jaws in 1975),[32][33] it failed to overtake Gone with the Wind's exhibition gross of $150 million.[31] News articles at the time proclaimed it was the first film to gross $100 million North America,[32] but such accounts are erroneous since this record in fact falls to The Sound of Music, released in 1965.[34] The film repeated its native success overseas, earning in total an unprecedented $142 million in worldwide theatrical rentals, to become the highest net earner.[35] Profits were so high for The Godfather that earnings for Gulf & Western Industries, Inc., which owned Paramount Pictures, jumped from seventy-seven cents per share to three dollars and thirty cents a share for the year, according to a Los Angeles Times article, dated December 13, 1972.[32] To date, it has grossed $286 million in international box office receipts,[36] and adjusted for ticket price inflation in North America, still ranks among the top 25 highest-grossing films.[37]Since its release, The Godfather has received universal critical acclaim.[38] Rotten Tomatoes reports that 100% of 74 critics gave the film a positive review, with an average score of 9.1/10. The website's critical consensus for the film was "The Godfather gets everything right; not only did the movie transcend expectations, it established new benchmarks for American cinema, " and the film was lauded as "one of Hollywood's greatest critical and commercial successes".[39] Metacritic, another review aggregator, assigned the film a perfect weighted average score of 100 (out of 100) based on 14 reviews from mainstream critics, considered to be "universal acclaim".[38]Both The Godfather and The Godfather Part II were selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry in 1990 and 1993, respectively. International critics routinely list these two among cinema's pinnacle achievements, sometimes considering them as one work. In the decennial 2002 Sight & Sound poll of film directors, the pair was ranked as the second best film of all time.[40] The critics poll separately voted it fourth. The American Film Institute[5] has listed it second in U.S. film history behind Citizen Kane. Other polls and publications have it first, as well, among them Entertainment Weekly,[41] and Empire magazine (November 2008)[42]The soundtrack's main theme by Nino Rota was also critically acclaimed; the main theme ("Speak Softly Love") is well-known and widely used (see Score Controversy for more information).Director Stanley Kubrick believed that The Godfather was possibly the greatest movie ever made, and had without question the best cast.[43]Previous Mafia movies had looked at the gangs from the perspective of an outraged outsider.[44] In contrast, The Godfather presents the gangster's perspective of the Mafia as a response to corrupt society.[44] Although the Corleone family is presented as immensely rich and powerful, no scenes depict prostitution, gambling, loan sharking or other forms of racketeering.[45] Some critics argue that the setting of a criminal counterculture allows for unapologetic gender stereotyping, and is an important part of the film's appeal ("You can act like a man!", Don Vito tells a weepy Johnny Fontane).[46]Real-life gangsters responded enthusiastically to the film, with many of them feeling it was a portrayal of how they were supposed to act.[47] Salvatore "Sammy the Bull" Gravano, the former Underboss in the Gambino crime family,[48] stated: "I left the movie stunned... I mean I floated out of the theater. Maybe it was fiction, but for me, then, that was our life. It was incredible. I remember talking to a multitude of guys, made guys, who felt exactly the same way. " According to Anthony Fiato after seeing the film, Patriarca crime family members Paulie Intiso and Nicky Giso altered their speech patterns closer to that of Vito Corleone's.[49] Intiso would frequently swear and use poor grammar; but after the movie came out, he started to articulate and philosophize more.[49]Remarking on the 40th anniversary of the film's release, film critic John Podhoretz praised The Godfather as "arguably the great American work of popular art" and "the summa of all great moviemaking before it".[50]The Godfather won three Academy Awards for Best Picture, Best Actor for Marlon Brando and Best Adapted Screenplay for both Mario Puzo and Francis Ford Coppola. The film had been nominated for eight other Academy Awards, including Best Supporting Actor for Al Pacino, James Caan, and Robert Duvall, Best Director for Coppola, Best Costume Design, Best Film Editing, and Best Sound.[51] The film also had a Best Original Score nomination but was disqualified when found out that Nino Rota had used a similar score in another film. Despite having three nominees for the Best Supporting Actor award, they all lost to Joel Grey in Cabaret. It also lost the Best Director, Best Sound and Best Film Editing to Cabaret.The film won five Golden Globes out of seven nominations. It won the Golden Globe for Best Picture  Drama, Best Director, Best Screenplay, Best Score and Best Actor  Drama for Brando. It received two nominations for Best Actor  Drama for Pacino and Best Supporting Actor for Caan.Nino Rota won the Grammy Award for Best Original Score for a Motion Picture or TV Special for the film's soundtrack.At the BAFTA Awards, Nino Rota won the Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music while Brando, Duvall and Pacino received nominations for Best Actor, Best Supporting Actor and Most Promising Newcomer, respectively. Anna Hill Johnstone was also nominated for Best Costume Design.Marlon Brando won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance, but turned down the Oscar, becoming the second actor to refuse a Best Actor award (the first being George C. Scott for Patton). Brando boycotted the Academy Award ceremony, sending instead American Indian Rights activist Sacheen Littlefeather, who appeared in full Apache dress, to state Brando's reasons, which were based on his objection to the depiction of American Indians[52] by Hollywood and television.Al Pacino also boycotted the Academy Award ceremony, as he was insulted at being nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor award, noting that he had more screen time than his co-star and Best Actor winner Marlon Brando and thus he should have received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actor.[53]Nino Rota's score was removed at the last minute from the list of 1973 Academy Award nominees when it was discovered that he had used the theme in Eduardo De Filippo's 1958 comedy Fortunella. Although in the earlier film the theme was played in a brisk, staccato and comedic style, the melody was the same as the love theme from The Godfather, and for that reason was deemed ineligible for an Oscar.[54] Despite this, The Godfather Part II won a 1974 Oscar for Best Original Score, although it featured the same love theme that made the 1972 score ineligible.Although many films about gangsters had been made before The Godfather, Coppola's sympathetic treatment of the Corleone family and their associates, and his portrayal of mobsters as characters of considerable psychological depth and complexity[60] was hardly usual in the genre. This was even more the case with The Godfather Part II, and the success of those two films, critically, artistically and financially, opened the doors for more and varied depictions of mobster life, including films such as Martin Scorsese's Goodfellas and TV series such as David Chase's The Sopranos.The image of the Mafia as being a feudal organization with the Don being both the protector of the small fry and the collector of obligations from them to repay his services, which The Godfather helped to popularize, is now an easily recognizable cultural trope, as is that of the Don's family as a "royal family". (This has spread into the real world as well  cf. John Gotti  the "Dapper Don", and his celebritized family.) This portrayal stands in contrast to the more sordid reality of lower level Mafia "familial" entanglements, as depicted in various post-Godfather Mafia fare, such as Scorsese's Mean Streets and Casino, and also to the grittier hard-boiled pre-Godfather films.In the 1999 film Analyze This, which starred Robert De Niro and Billy Crystal, many references are made both directly and indirectly to The Godfather. One dream scene is almost a shot by shot replica of the attempted assassination of Vito Corleone (Crystal playing the Don and De Niro playing Fredo). In the 1990 comedy The Freshman, Marlon Brando plays a role reminiscent of Don Corleone. And one of those most unlikely homages to this film came in 2004, when the PG-rated, animated family film Shark Tale was released with a storyline that nodded at this and other movies about the Mafia. Similarly, Rugrats in Paris, based on a Nickelodeon children's show, began with an extended parody of The Godfather.The 2005 Indian film Sarkar, directed by Ram Gopal Varma, with Amitabh Bachchan in the lead role as a "Don" and his son Abhishek Bachchan as the equivalent of Michael, is modeled on The Godfather with due credits appearing at the beginning of the film.In the DVD commentary for Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, George Lucas stated that the interwoven scenes of Anakin Skywalker killing Separatist leaders and Palpatine announcing the beginning of the Galactic Empire was an homage to the christening and assassination sequence in The Godfather.The Godfather, along with the other films in the trilogy, had a strong impact on the public at large. Don Vito Corleone's line, "I'm gonna make him an offer he can't refuse", was voted as the second most memorable line in cinema history in AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes by the American Film Institute.[61] The line actually originates in the French novel Le Pre Goriot, by Honor de Balzac, wherein Vautrin tells Eugne that he is "making him an offer that he cannot refuse".[citation needed]An indication of the continuing influence of The Godfather and its sequels can be gleaned from the many references to it which have appeared in every medium of popular culture in the decades since the film's initial release. That these homages, quotations, visual references, satires, and parodies continue to pop up even now shows clearly the film's enduring impact.In Set it Off, four women - Lita "Stoney" Newsome (Jada Pinkett), Cleopatra "Cleo" Sims (Queen Latifah), Francesca "Frankie" Sutton (Vivica A. Fox), and Tisean "T.T." Williams (Kimberly Elise) - meet around a conference table at the office building they clean to plan a series of bank heists, during which time they do imitations of The Godfather.[62]In You've Got Mail, Joe Fox (played by Tom Hanks) quotes The Godfather, positing:The Warner Bros. animated show Animaniacs featured several segments called "Goodfeathers", with pigeons spoofing characters from various gangster films. One of the characters is "The Godpigeon", an obvious parody of Brando's portrayal of Vito Corleone.John Belushi appeared in a Saturday Night Live sketch as Vito Corleone in a therapy session trying to properly express his inner feelings towards the Tattaglia Family, who, in addition to muscling in on his territory, "also, they shot my son Santino 56 times".The Simpsons makes numerous references to The Godfather, including one scene in the episode "Strong Arms of the Ma" that parodies the Sonny-Carlo streetfight scene, with Marge Simpson beating a mugger in front of an animated version of the same New York streetscape, including using the lid of a trash can during the fight. The "All's Fair in Oven War" final scene shows James Caan being ambushed by hillbillies (Cletus relatives) at a toll booth, a parody of the scene when Sonny Corleone (portrayed by Caan) is shot and killed. The later episode "The Mook, the Chef, the Wife and Her Homer" parodies the film's ending scene, with Lisa Simpson taking Kay Adams' role and Fat Tony's son Michael standing in for Michael Corleone.In the television show The Sopranos, Tony Soprano's topless bar is named Bada Bing after the line in The Godfather when Sonny Corleone says, "You've gotta get up close like this and bada-bing! You blow their brains all over your nice Ivy League suit."The theatrical version of The Godfather debuted on network television in 1974 with only minor edits. The next year, Coppola created The Godfather Saga expressly for American television in a release that combined The Godfather and The Godfather Part II with unused footage from those two films in a chronological telling that, because it toned down the violent, sexual, and profane material for its NBC debut on November 18, 1977. In 1981, Paramount released the Godfather Epic boxed set, which also told the story of the first two films in chronological order, again with additional scenes, but not redacted for broadcast sensibilities. Coppola returned to the film again in 1992 when he updated that release with footage from The Godfather Part III and more unreleased material. This home viewing release, under the title The Godfather Trilogy 19011980, had a total run time of 583 minutes (9 hours, 43 minutes), not including the set's bonus documentary by Jeff Werner on the making of the films, "The Godfather Family: A Look Inside".The Godfather DVD Collection was released on October 9, 2001 in a package[63] that contained all three filmseach with a commentary track by Coppolaand a bonus disc that featured a 73-minute documentary from 1991 entitled The Godfather Family: A Look Inside and other miscellany about the film: the additional scenes originally contained in The Godfather Saga; Francis Coppola's Notebook (a look inside a notebook the director kept with him at all times during the production of the film); rehearsal footage; a promotional featurette from 1971; and video segments on Gordon Willis's cinematography, Nino Rota's and Carmine Coppola's music, the director, the locations and Mario Puzo's screenplays. The DVD also held a Corleone family tree, a "Godfather" timeline, and footage of the Academy Award acceptance speeches.[64]After a careful restoration of the first two movies, The Godfather movies were released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc on September 23, 2008, under the title The Godfather: The Coppola Restoration. The work was done by Robert A. Harris of Film Preserve. The Blu-ray Disc box set (four discs) includes high-definition extra features on the restoration and film. They are included on Disc 5 of the DVD box set (five discs).The restoration was confirmed by Francis Ford Coppola during a question-and-answer session for The Godfather Part III, when he said that he had just seen the new transfer and it was "terrific".Other extras are ported over from Paramount's 2001 DVD release. There are slight differences between the repurposed extras on the DVD and Blu-ray Disc sets, with the HD box having more content.[65]Paramount lists the new (HD) extra features as:In March 2006, a video game version of The Godfather was released by Electronic Arts. Before his death, Marlon Brando provided voice work for Vito; however, owing to poor sound quality from Brando's failing health, only parts of the recordings could be used. A sound-alike's voice had to be used in the "missing parts". James Caan, Robert Duvall, and Abe Vigoda lent their voices and likenesses as well, and several other Godfather cast members had their likeness in the game. However, Al Pacino's likeness and voice (Michael Corleone) was not in the game as Al Pacino sold his likeness and voice exclusively for use in the Scarface video game. Francis Ford Coppola said in April 2005 that he was not informed and did not approve of Paramount allowing the game's production, and openly criticized the move.[66]Mario PuzoFrancis Ford CoppolaMarlon BrandoAl PacinoJames CaanRichard S. CastellanoRobert DuvallSterling HaydenJohn CazaleDiane KeatonNino RotaCarmine Coppola (additional music)William H. ReynoldsPeter Zinner[1]March 15, 1972(1972-03-15) (US)EnglishSicilian1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Coppola and Paramount
3.2 Casting
3.3 Filming

3.3.1 Locations
3.3.2 Music



3.1 Coppola and Paramount3.2 Casting3.3 Filming

3.3.1 Locations
3.3.2 Music

3.3.1 Locations3.3.2 Music4 Reception

4.1 Box office performance
4.2 Critical response
4.3 Awards

4.3.1 Marlon Brando and Al Pacino boycott
4.3.2 Score controversy
4.3.3 Honors
4.3.4 Current rankings

4.3.4.1 American Film Institute





4.1 Box office performance4.2 Critical response4.3 Awards

4.3.1 Marlon Brando and Al Pacino boycott
4.3.2 Score controversy
4.3.3 Honors
4.3.4 Current rankings

4.3.4.1 American Film Institute



4.3.1 Marlon Brando and Al Pacino boycott4.3.2 Score controversy4.3.3 Honors4.3.4 Current rankings

4.3.4.1 American Film Institute

4.3.4.1 American Film Institute5 Legacy

5.1 Cinematic influence
5.2 In popular culture
5.3 In film

5.3.1 In television



5.1 Cinematic influence5.2 In popular culture5.3 In film

5.3.1 In television

5.3.1 In television6 Releases for television and video

6.1 Restoration
6.2 Video game

6.1 Restoration6.2 Video game7 References8 External links3.1 Coppola and Paramount3.2 Casting3.3 Filming

3.3.1 Locations
3.3.2 Music

3.3.1 Locations3.3.2 Music3.3.1 Locations3.3.2 Music4.1 Box office performance4.2 Critical response4.3 Awards

4.3.1 Marlon Brando and Al Pacino boycott
4.3.2 Score controversy
4.3.3 Honors
4.3.4 Current rankings

4.3.4.1 American Film Institute



4.3.1 Marlon Brando and Al Pacino boycott4.3.2 Score controversy4.3.3 Honors4.3.4 Current rankings

4.3.4.1 American Film Institute

4.3.4.1 American Film Institute4.3.1 Marlon Brando and Al Pacino boycott4.3.2 Score controversy4.3.3 Honors4.3.4 Current rankings

4.3.4.1 American Film Institute

4.3.4.1 American Film Institute4.3.4.1 American Film Institute5.1 Cinematic influence5.2 In popular culture5.3 In film

5.3.1 In television

5.3.1 In television5.3.1 In television6.1 Restoration6.2 Video gameMarlon Brando as Vito Corleone, formerly known as Vito Andolini, who is the Don (the "boss") of the Corleone family. He is a native Sicilian married to Carmela Corleone. Vito is the father of Santino (Sonny), Federico (Fredo), Michele (Michael) and Constanzia (Connie).Al Pacino as Michael Corleone, the Don's youngest son, recently returned from World War II. The only college-educated member of the family, Michael initially wants nothing to do with the "family business". He is the main protagonist of the story and his evolution from doe-eyed outsider to ruthless boss is the key plotline of the film.James Caan as Santino "Sonny" Corleone, Don Corleone's hot-headed eldest son. As underboss, he is being groomed to succeed his father as head of the Corleone family.Richard S. Castellano as Peter Clemenza, a caporegime for the Corleone family. He is also an old friend of Vito Corleone and Salvatore Tessio.Robert Duvall as Tom Hagen, Don Corleone's informally adopted son, he is the family lawyer and consigliere (counselor). Unlike the Corleones, he is of German-Irish descent, not Sicilian.Diane Keaton as Kay Adams-Corleone, initially Michael's non-Italian girlfriend and then his second wife and the mother of his two children.John Cazale as Fredo Corleone, the middle son of the Corleone family. Deeply insecure and not very bright, he is considered the weakest of the Corleone brothers.Talia Shire as Constanzia "Connie" Corleone, the youngest child and only daughter of the Corleone family. She marries Carlo Rizzi at the beginning of the film.Abe Vigoda as Salvatore Tessio, a caporegime for the family. He is also an old friend of Vito Corleone and Peter Clemenza.Al Lettieri as Virgil "The Turk" Sollozzo, a heroin dealer associated with the Tattaglia family. He asks Don Corleone to protect the Tattaglia family's heroin business through his political connections.Gianni Russo as Carlo Rizzi, Introduced to the Corleone family by Sonny; became Connie's husband. Ultimately he betrays Sonny to the Barzini family.Sterling Hayden as Captain McCluskey, a corrupt police captain on Sollozzo's payroll.Lenny Montana as Luca Brasi, a loyal enforcer utilized by Vito Corleone.Richard Conte as Emilio Barzini, Don of the Barzini family.Al Martino as Johnny Fontane, a world-famous popular singer and godson of Vito, loosely based on Frank Sinatra.John Marley as Jack Woltz, a powerful Hollywood producer.Alex Rocco as Moe Greene, a longtime associate of the Corleone family who owns a Las Vegas hotel, based on Bugsy Siegel.Morgana King as Carmela Corleone, Vito's wife and mother of Sonny, Fredo, Michael, and Connie, and adoptive mother to Tom Hagen.Corrado Gaipa as Don Tommasino, an old friend of Vito Corleone, who shelters Michael during his exile in Sicily.Johnny Martino as Paulie Gatto, a soldier under Peter Clemenza and Vito's driver.Victor Rendina as Philip Tattaglia, Don of the Tattaglia family.Tony Giorgio as Bruno Tattaglia, son and underboss. Sonny Corleone has him assassinated in retaliation for the shooting of Vito Corleone.Simonetta Stefanelli as Apollonia Vitelli-Corleone, a young girl Michael meets and marries while in Sicily.Louis Guss as Don Zaluchi, Don of the Zaluchi family of Detroit.Tom Rosqui as Rocco Lampone, a soldier under Clemenza who eventually becomes a caporegime in the Corleone family.Joe Spinell as Willi Cicci, a soldier in the Corleone family.Richard Bright as Al Neri, Michael Corleone's personal bodyguard who eventually becomes a caporegime.Julie Gregg as Sandra Corleone, the wife and, later, widow of Sonny.Sofia Coppola (uncredited) as Michael Francis Rizzi, godchild of Michael Corleone.The film is ranked at the top of Metacritic's top 100 list,[55] and in the top 10 on Rotten Tomatoes' all time best list (100% "Certified Fresh").[56]In 2002, The Godfather and The Godfather Part II reached No. 2 on Film4's list of The 100 Greatest Films of All Time.[57]Entertainment Weekly named The Godfather the greatest film ever made.[41][58][59]The Godfather was voted in at No. 1 on Empire magazine's list of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time in November 2008.[42]In Time Out's 2003 readers' poll, The Godfather was ranked the second best film of all time, after Some Like It Hot.1998 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  No. 32001 AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills  No. 112003 AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Vito Corleone  Nominated Villain

Vito Corleone  Nominated Villain2005 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"I'm going to make him an offer he can't refuse."  No. 2
"Leave the gun. Take the cannoli."  Nominated
"It's a Sicilian message. It means Luca Brasi sleeps with the fishes."  Nominated

"I'm going to make him an offer he can't refuse."  No. 2"Leave the gun. Take the cannoli."  Nominated"It's a Sicilian message. It means Luca Brasi sleeps with the fishes."  Nominated2005 AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  No. 52007 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  No. 22008 AFI's 10 Top 10  No. 1 Gangster filmVito Corleone  Nominated Villain"I'm going to make him an offer he can't refuse."  No. 2"Leave the gun. Take the cannoli."  Nominated"It's a Sicilian message. It means Luca Brasi sleeps with the fishes."  NominatedGodfather WorldThe Masterpiece That Almost Wasn't...when the shooting stoppedEmulsional Rescue Revealing The GodfatherThe Godfather on the Red CarpetFour Short Films on The Godfather

The Godfather vs. The Godfather, Part II
Cannoli
Riffing on the Riffing
Clemenza

The Godfather vs. The Godfather, Part IICannoliRiffing on the RiffingClemenzaThe Godfather vs. The Godfather, Part IICannoliRiffing on the RiffingClemenza1991: Von Gunden, Kenneth (1991). Postmodern auteurs: Coppola, Lucas, De Palma, Spielberg, and Scorsese. McFarland & Company. p.36. ISBN9780899506180. "Since The Godfather had earned over $85 million in U.S.-Canada rentals (the worldwide box-office gross was $285 million), a sequel, according to the usual formula, could be expected to earn approximately two-thirds of the original's box-office take (ultimately Godfather II had rentals of $30 million)."1997 re-release: "The Godfather (Re-issue) (1997)". Box Office Mojo. http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=godfather97.htm. Retrieved November 20, 2012. "North America:$1,267,490"De Stefano, George (2007). An Offer We Can't Refuse: The Mafia in the Mind of America. ISBN 0-86547-962-3.Nourmand, Tony (2007). The Godfather in Pictures. London: Boxtree. ISBN 978-0-7522-2637-8.The Godfather  Official site from Paramount PicturesThe Godfather at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Godfather at Rotten TomatoesThe Godfather at MetacriticThe Godfather at Box Office MojoInterview of Francis Ford Coppola, The Godfather SpeaksFact and Fiction in The GodfatherThe Guardian, April 22, 2006, "Mob mentality"The Godfather Has The Greatest Mob HitsGone with the Wind is a 1939 American historical epic film adapted from Margaret Mitchell's Pulitzer-winning 1936 novel of the same name. It was produced by David O. Selznick and directed by Victor Fleming from a screenplay by Sidney Howard. Set in the 19th-century American South, the film stars Clark Gable, Vivien Leigh, Leslie Howard, Olivia de Havilland, and Hattie McDaniel, among others, and tells a story of the American Civil War and Reconstruction era from a white Southern point of view.The film received ten Academy Awards (eight competitive, two honorary), a record that stood for 20 years[1] until Ben-Hur surpassed it in 1960.[2] In the American Film Institute's inaugural Top 100 Best American Films of All Time list of 1998, it was ranked fourth, and in 1989 was selected to be preserved by the National Film Registry.[3] The film was the longest American sound film made up to that time  3 hours 44 minutes, plus a 15-minute intermission  and was among the first of the major films shot in color (Technicolor), winning the first Academy Award for Best Cinematography in the category for color films. It became the highest-grossing film of all-time shortly after its release, holding the position until 1966. After adjusting for inflation, it has still earned more than any other film in box office history.The film opens on a large cotton plantation called Tara in rural Georgia in 1861, on the eve of the American Civil War. Scarlett O'Hara is flirting with the two Tarleton brothers, Brent and Stuart, who have been expelled from the University of Georgia. Scarlett, Suellen, and Careen are the daughters of Irish immigrant Gerald OHara and his wife, Ellen O'Hara, who is of aristocratic French ancestry. The brothers share a secret with Scarlett: Ashley Wilkes, whom Scarlett secretly loves, is to be married to his cousin, Melanie Hamilton. The engagement is to be announced the next day at a barbecue at Ashley's home, the nearby plantation Twelve Oaks.At the Twelve Oaks party, Scarlett notices that she is being admired by Rhett Butler, who has been turned out of West Point and disowned by his Charleston family. Rhett finds himself in further disfavor among the male guests when, during a discussion of the probability of war, he states that the South has no chance against the superior numbers and industrial might of the North. The ladies retire to take an afternoon nap, but Scarlett sneaks out to be alone with Ashley in the library, and confesses her love for him. He admits he has always secretly loved Scarlett but that he and the sweet Melanie are more compatible. She accuses Ashley of misleading her and slaps him in anger. Ashley exits as Rhett, who has been sleeping unseen on a couch, reveals he has overheard the conversation between Ashley and Scarlett. Rhett promises to keep her secret and Scarlett leaves the library in haste. The barbecue is disrupted by the announcement that war has broken out. As the men rush to enlist, the ladies are awakened from their naps. As Scarlett watches Ashley kiss Melanie goodbye from the upstairs window, Melanie's shy younger brother Charles Hamilton, with whom Scarlett had been innocently flirting, asks for her hand in marriage before he goes. Though she does not love Charles, Scarlett consents. They are married before he leaves to fight.Scarlett is quickly widowed when Charles dies from a bout of pneumonia and measles while serving in the Confederate Army. Scarlett's mother sends her to the Hamilton home in Atlanta to cheer her up, although the OHaras' outspoken housemaid Mammy tells Scarlett she knows she is going there only to wait for Ashley's return. Scarlett, who should not attend a party while in deep mourning, attends a charity bazaar in Atlanta with Melanie. There, Scarlett is the object of shocked comments on the part of the elderly women who represent proper Atlanta society. Rhett, now a heroic blockade runner for the Confederacy, makes a surprise appearance. To raise money for the Confederate war effort, gentlemen are invited to offer bids for ladies to dance with them. Rhett makes an inordinately large bid for Scarlett and, as the elderly ladies murmur objections, Scarlett agrees to dance with him. As they dance, Rhett tells her he intends to win her, which she says will never happen.The tide of war turns against the Confederacy after the Battle of Gettysburg in which many of the men of Scarlett's town are killed. Scarlett makes another unsuccessful appeal to Ashley while he is visiting on Christmas furlough, although they do share a private and passionate kiss in the parlor on Christmas Day, just before he leaves for the war. In the hospital, Scarlett and Melanie care for a convalescent soldier.Eight months later, as the city is besieged by the Union Army in the Atlanta Campaign, Melanie goes into premature and difficult labor. Keeping her promise to Ashley to "take care of Melanie," Scarlett and her young house servant Prissy must deliver the child without medical assistance. Scarlett calls upon Rhett to bring her home to Tara immediately with Melanie, Prissy, and the baby. He appears with a horse and wagon and takes them out of the city through the burning depot and warehouse district. Instead of accompanying her all the way to Tara, he sends her on her way with a nearly dead horse, helplessly frail Melanie, her baby, and tearful Prissy, and with a passionate kiss as he goes off to fight. On her journey home, Scarlett finds Twelve Oaks burned, ruined and deserted. She is relieved to find Tara still standing but deserted by all except her parents, her sisters, and two servants: Mammy and Pork. Scarlett learns that her mother has just died of typhoid fever and her father's mind has begun to fail under the strain. With Tara pillaged by Union troops and the fields untended, Scarlett vows she will do anything for the survival of her family and herself, exclaiming, "As God is my witness, I'll never be hungry again!"Scarlett sets her family and servants to picking the cotton fields. She also kills a Union deserter who threatens her during a burglary and finds Union currency in his wallet, enough to sustain her family and servants for a time. With the defeat of the Confederacy and war's end, Ashley returns. Mammy restrains Scarlett from running to him when he reunites with Melanie. The dispirited Ashley finds he is of little help to Tara, and when Scarlett begs him to run away with her, he confesses his desire for her and kisses her passionately, but says he cannot leave Melanie. Gerald dies after he is thrown from his horse in an attempt to chase from his property a Scalawag, his former plantation overseer who now wants to buy Tara.Scarlett realizes she cannot pay the rising taxes on Tara implemented by Reconstructionists. Knowing Rhett is in Atlanta, she has Mammy make an elaborate gown for her from her mothers drapes. However, upon her visit, Rhett, now in jail, tells her his foreign bank accounts have been blocked, and that her attempt to get his money has been in vain. As Scarlett departs, she encounters her sisters fianc, the middle-aged Frank Kennedy, who now owns a successful general store and lumber mill. Scarlett lies to Kennedy by saying Suellen got tired of waiting and married another beau, and after becoming Mrs. Frank Kennedy, Scarlett takes over his business and becomes wealthy. When Ashley is about to take a job with a bank in the north, Scarlett preys on his weakness by weeping that she needs him to help run the mill; pressured by the sympathetic Melanie, he relents. One day, after Scarlett is attacked while driving alone through a nearby shantytown, Frank, Ashley, and others make a night raid on the shantytown. Ashley is wounded in a melee with Union troops, and Frank is killed.With Franks funeral barely over, Rhett visits Scarlett and proposes marriage. Scarlett accepts. He kisses her passionately and tells her that he will win her love one day because they are both the same. After a honeymoon in New Orleans, Rhett promises to restore Tara to its former grandeur, while Scarlett builds the biggest mansion in Atlanta. The two have a daughter. Scarlett wants to name her Eugenie Victoria, but Rhett names her Bonnie Blue Butler. Rhett adores her. He does everything to win the good opinion of Atlanta society for his daughters sake. Scarlett, still pining for Ashley and chagrined at the perceived ruin of her figure (her waist has gone from eighteen-and-a-half inches to twenty), lets Rhett know that she wants no more children and that they will no longer share a bed. Rhett steps on a picture of Ashley that Scatlett had been admiring and in anger, he kicks open the door that separates their bedrooms to show her that she cannot keep him away.When visiting the mill one day, Scarlett listens to a nostalgic Ashley, and when she consoles him with an embrace, they are spied by two gossips including Ashley's sister India, who hates Scarlett. They eagerly spread the rumor and Scarletts reputation is again sullied. Later that night, Rhett, having heard the rumors, forces Scarlett out of bed and to attend a birthday party for Ashley. Incapable of believing anything bad of her beloved sister-in-law, Melanie stands by Scarlett's side so that all know that she believes the gossip to be false.At home later that night, Scarlett finds Rhett downstairs drunk. Blind with jealousy, he tells Scarlett that he could kill her if he thought it would make her forget Ashley. He carries her up the stairs in his arms, telling her, "This is one night you're not turning me out." She awakens the next morning with a look of guilty pleasure, but Rhett returns to apologize for his behavior and offers a divorce, which Scarlett rejects saying it would be a disgrace. Rhett decides to take Bonnie on an extended trip to London only to realize, after Bonnie suffers a terrible nightmare, that she still needs her mother by her side. Rhett returns and Scarlett is delighted to see him, but he rebuffs her attempts at reconciliation. She tells him that she is pregnant again. An argument ensues, and Scarlett, enraged, lunges at Rhett, falls down the stairs, and suffers a miscarriage. Rhett, frantic with guilt, cries to Melanie about his jealousy yet refrains from telling Melanie about Scarlett's feelings for Ashley. As Scarlett is recovering, little Bonnie dies while attempting to jump a fence with her pony. Scarlett blames Rhett; Rhett blames himself. Melanie visits the home to comfort them and convinces Rhett to allow Bonnie to be laid to rest, but then collapses during a second pregnancy she was warned could kill her.On her deathbed, Melanie asks Scarlett to look after Ashley for her, as Scarlett had looked after her for Ashley. With her dying breath, Melanie tells Scarlett to be kind to Rhett because he loves her. Outside, Ashley collapses in tears, forcing Scarlett to realize that Ashley only ever truly loved Melanie. Scarlett runs home to find Rhett preparing to leave. She pleads with him, telling him she realizes now that she had loved him all along, that she never really loved Ashley. However, he refuses, saying that with Bonnie's death went any chance of reconciliation.As Rhett walks out the door, she pleads, "Rhett, if you go, where shall I go? What shall I do?" He answers, "Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn" and walks away into the fog. She sits on her stairs and weeps in despair, "What is there that matters?" She then recalls the voices of Gerald, Ashley, and Rhett, all of whom remind her that her strength comes from Tara itself. Hope lights Scarlett's face: "Tara! Home. I'll go home, and I'll think of some way to get him back! After all, tomorrow is another day!" It ends with a silhouette of Scarlett standing under a large tree, looking forward. In the distance lies Tara.(The credits in the film contain an error: George Reeves and Fred Crane appear as the Tarleton brothers. Reeves plays Stuart, but is listed as Brent, while Crane, playing Brent, is listed as Stuart.)As of 2012, there were four surviving credited cast members from the film. Alicia Rhett (born February 1, 1915), who played India Wilkes, is the oldest surviving cast member. Also surviving are Olivia de Havilland (born July 1, 1916), who played Melanie Wilkes; Mary Anderson (born April 3, 1920), who played Maybelle Meriweather; and Mickey Kuhn (born September 21, 1932), who played Beau Wilkes.Before publication several Hollywood executives and studios declined to create a film based on the novel, including Louis B. Mayer and Irving Thalberg at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Pandro Berman at RKO, and David O. Selznick of Selznick International Pictures. Jack Warner liked the story, but Warner Bros.'s biggest star Bette Davis was uninterested, and Darryl Zanuck of 20th Century Fox did not offer enough money. Selznick changed his mind after his story editor Kay Brown and business partner John Hay Whitney urged him to buy the film rights. A month after the book's publication in June 1936, Selznick bought the rights for $50,000 (equal to $837,410 today),[4]:17 a record amount at the time.The casting of the two lead roles became a complex, two-year endeavor. For the role of Rhett Butler, Clark Gable was an almost immediate favorite for both the public and Selznick. As Selznick had no male stars under long-term contract, he needed to borrow an actor from another studio.[4]:19 Gary Cooper was Selznick's first choice because Cooper's contract with Samuel Goldwyn involved a common distribution company, United Artists, with which Selznick had an eight-picture deal. However, Goldwyn remained non-committal in negotiations.[5] Warner offered a package of Bette Davis, Errol Flynn, and Olivia de Havilland for lead roles in return for the distribution rights. By this time, Selznick was determined to get Gable and eventually found a way to borrow him from MGM, which normally never lent its actors. Selznick's father-in-law, MGM chief Louis B. Mayer, offered in May 1938 to provide Gable and $1,250,000 ($20,638,298 today[6]) for half of the film's budget but for a high price: Selznick would have to pay Gable's $7,000 ($115,574 today[6]) weekly salary, 50% of the profits would go to MGM,[4]:19 the film's distribution would be credited to MGM's parent company, Loew's, Inc., and Loew's would receive 15% of the movie's gross income. Selznick accepted this offer in August, and Gable was cast.The arrangement to release through MGM meant delaying the start of production until Selznick International completed its contract with United Artists and Gable became available. Selznick used the delay to continue to revise the script and, more importantly, build publicity for the film by searching for the role of Scarlett. Selznick began a nationwide casting call that interviewed 1,400 unknowns. The effort cost $100,000 ($1,651,064 today[6]) and was useless for the film but created "priceless" publicity.[4]:20 Many famous, or soon-to-be-famous, actresses were screen-tested, auditioned, or considered, including: Jean Arthur, Lucille Ball, Tallulah Bankhead, Joan Bennett, Clara Bow, Joan Crawford, Bette Davis, Frances Dee, Olivia de Havilland, Irene Dunne, Joan Fontaine, Greer Garson, Paulette Goddard, Susan Hayward, Miriam Hopkins, Katharine Hepburn, Carole Lombard, Ida Lupino, Merle Oberon, Norma Shearer, Barbara Stanwyck, Margaret Sullavan, Lana Turner, Shelley Winters, and Loretta Young. Miriam Hopkins was the choice of the novel's author Margaret Mitchell, who felt Hopkins, a Georgia native, was just the right type of actress to play Scarlett as written in the book. Unfortunately Hopkins was in her mid-thirties at the time and was considered too old for the part.Four actresses, including Jean Arthur and Joan Bennett, were still under consideration by December 1938, however, only two finalists, Paulette Goddard and Vivien Leigh, were tested in Technicolor, both on December 20.[7] Goddard almost won the role, but controversy over her marriage with Charlie Chaplin caused Selznick to change his mind.[4]:20Selznick had been quietly considering Vivien Leigh, a young English actress who was still little known in America, for the role of Scarlett since February 1938 when Selznick saw her in Fire Over England and A Yank at Oxford. Leigh's American agent was the London representative of the Myron Selznick talent agency (headed by David Selznick's brother, one of the owners of Selznick International), and she had requested in February that her name be submitted for consideration as Scarlett. By the summer of 1938 the Selznicks were negotiating with Alexander Korda, to whom Leigh was under contract, for her services later that year.[8] But, for publicity reasons, David arranged to meet her for the first time on the night of December 10, 1938, when the burning of Atlanta was filmed.[4]:20 The story was invented for the press that Leigh and Laurence Olivier were just visiting the studio as guests of Myron Selznick, who was also Olivier's agent and that Leigh was in Hollywood hoping for a part in Olivier's current movie, Wuthering Heights. In a letter to his wife two days later, Selznick admitted that Leigh was "the Scarlett dark horse", and after a series of screen tests, her casting was announced on January 13, 1939. Just before the shooting of the film, Selznick informed Ed Sullivan: "Scarlett O'Hara's parents were French and Irish. Identically, Miss Leigh's parents are French and Irish."[9]Of original screenplay writer Sidney Howard, film historian Joanne Yeck writes, "reducing the intricacies of Gone with the Wind's epic dimensions was a herculean task ... and Howard's first submission was far too long, and would have required at least six hours of film; ... [producer] Selznick wanted Howard to remain on the set to make revisions...but Howard refused to leave New England [and] as a result, revisions were handled by a host of local writers, including Ben Hecht..."[10]Selznick replaced the director George Cukor three weeks into filming and then had the script rewritten. He sought out Victor Fleming, who, at the time, was directing The Wizard of Oz. Fleming was dissatisfied with the script, so Selznick brought in famed writer Ben Hecht to rewrite the entire screenplay within five days."[11] The popular play Moonlight and Magnolias by playwright Ron Hutchinson, is about this dramatic episode when "Selznick literally locked himself, Fleming and screenwriter Ben Hecht in a room for five days to completely redo the script."[12][13]By the time of the film's release in 1939, there was some question as to who should receive screen credit," writes Yeck. "But despite the number of writers and changes, the final script was remarkably close to Howard's version. The fact that Howard's name alone appears on the credits may have been as much a gesture to his memory as to his writing, for in 1939 Sidney Howard died tragically at age forty-eight in a farm-tractor accident, and before the movie's premiere."[10]Selznick, in a memo written in October 1939, discussed the film's writing credits:According to Hecht biographer, William MacAdams, "At dawn on Sunday, February 20, 1939, David Selznick ... and director Victor Fleming shook Hecht awake to inform him he was on loan from MGM and must come with them immediately and go to work on Gone with the Wind, which Selznick had begun shooting five weeks before. It was costing Selznick $50,000 each day the film was on hold waiting for a final screenplay rewrite and time was of the essence.[14]:199Hecht was in the middle of working on the film At the Circus for the Marx brothers."[14]:199 Recalling the episode in a letter to screenwriter friend Gene Fowler, he said he hadn't read the novel but Selznick and director Fleming could not wait for him to read it. They would act out scenes based on Sidney Howard's original script which needed to be rewritten in a hurry. Hecht wrote, "After each scene had been performed and discussed, I sat down at the typewriter and wrote it out. Selznick and Fleming, eager to continue with their acting, kept hurrying me. We worked in this fashion for seven days, putting in eighteen to twenty hours a day. Selznick refused to let us eat lunch, arguing that food would slow us up. He provided bananas and salted peanuts....thus on the seventh day I had completed, unscathed, the first nine reels of the Civil War epic."[14]:200MacAdams writes, "It is impossible to determine exactly how much Hecht scripted...In the official credits filed with the Screen Writers' Guild, Sidney Howard was of course awarded the sole screen credit, but four other writers were appended ... Jo Swerling for contributing to the treatment, Oliver H. P. Garrett and Barbara Keon to screenplay construction, and Hecht, to dialogue, so it would appear Hecht's influence was not insubstantial."[14]:201Principal photography began January 26, 1939, and ended on June 27, 1939, with post-production work (including a fifth version of the opening scene) going to November 11, 1939. Director George Cukor, with whom Selznick had a long working relationship, and who had spent almost two years in preproduction on Gone with the Wind, was replaced after less than three weeks of shooting. Olivia de Havilland said that she learned of George Cukor's firing from Vivien Leigh on the day the Atlanta bazaar scene was filmed. The pair went to Selznick's office in full costume and begged him to change his mind. Selznick apologized, but refused.[note 1] Victor Fleming, who was directing The Wizard of Oz, was called in from MGM to complete the picture, although Cukor continued privately to coach Leigh and De Havilland. Another MGM director, Sam Wood, worked for two weeks in May when Fleming temporarily left the production due to exhaustion.[15]Cinematographer Lee Garmes began the production, but after a month of shooting what Selznick and his associates thought was "too dark" footage, was replaced with Ernest Haller, working with Technicolor cinematographer Ray Rennahan. Most of the filming was done on "the back forty" of Selznick International with all the location scenes being photographed in California, mostly in Los Angeles County or neighboring Ventura County.[16] Tara, which for many Americans is the iconic Southern plantation house, existed only as a plywood and papier-mch facade built on the "back forty" California studio lot.[17] For the burning of Atlanta other false facades were built in front of the "back forty"'s many abandoned sets, and Selznick himself operated the controls for the explosives that burned them down.[4]:20 Estimated production costs were $3.85million;[18] only Ben-Hur (1925) and Hell's Angels (1930) had cost more.[19]Although rumor persists that the Hays Office fined Selznick $5,000 for using the word "damn" in Butler's exit line, in fact the Motion Picture Association board passed an amendment to the Production Code on November 1, 1939, that forbade use of the words "hell" or "damn" except when their use "shall be essential and required for portrayal, in proper historical context, of any scene or dialogue based upon historical fact or folklore ... or a quotation from a literary work, provided that no such use shall be permitted which is intrinsically objectionable or offends good taste." With that amendment, the Production Code Administration had no further objection to Rhett's closing line.[20] This is also discussed in the documentary film, The Making of a Legend: Gone With The Wind.When Selznick was asked by the press in early September how he felt about the film, he said: "At noon I think it's divine, at midnight I think it's lousy. Sometimes I think it's the greatest picture ever made. But if it's only a great picture, I'll still be satisfied."[22]On September 9, 1939, Selznick, his wife, Irene, investor Jock Whitney, and film editor Hal Kern drove out to Riverside, California with all of the film reels to preview it before an audience. The film was still unfinished at this stage, missing many optical effects and most of Max Steiner's music score. They arrived at the Fox Theatre in Riverside, which was playing a double feature of Hawaiian Nights and Beau Geste. Kern called for the manager and explained that they had selected his theatre for the first public screening of Gone with the Wind. He was told that after Hawaiian Nights had finished, he could make an announcement of the preview, but was forbidden to say what the film was. People were permitted to leave, but the theatre would thereafter be sealed with no re-admissions and no phone calls out. The manager was reluctant, but finally agreed. His only request was to call his wife to come to the theatre immediately. Kern stood by him as he made the call to make sure he did not reveal the name of the film to her.When the film began, there was a buzz in the audience when Selznick's name appeared, for they had read about the making of the film for over two years. In an interview years later, Kern described the exact moment the audience realized what was happening:"When Margaret Mitchell's name came on the screen, you never heard such a sound in your life. They just yelled, they stood up on the seats...I had the [manually operated sound] box. And I had that music wide open and you couldn't hear a thing. Mrs. Selznick was crying like a baby and so was David and so was I. Oh, what a thrill! And when Gone with the Wind came on the screen, it was thunderous!"In his seminal biography of Selznick, David Thomson wrote that the audience's response before the story had even started "was the greatest moment of his life, the greatest victory and redemption of all his failings."[23] When the film ended, there was a huge ovation. In the preview cards filled out after the screening, two-thirds of the audience rated it as excellent, an unusually high rating.[citation needed] Most of the audience begged that the film not be cut shorter, and many suggested that instead, they eliminate any newsreels, shorts and B-movie feature.One million people came to Atlanta[4]:24 for the film's premiere at the Loew's Grand Theatre on December 15, 1939. It was the climax of three days of festivities hosted by Mayor William B. Hartsfield, which included a parade of limousines featuring stars from the film, receptions, thousands of Confederate flags, false antebellum fronts on stores and homes, and a costume ball. Eurith D. Rivers, the governor of Georgia, declared December 15 a state holiday. The New York Times reported that thousands lined the streets as "the demonstration exceeded anything in Atlanta's history for noise, magnitude and excitement".[24] President Jimmy Carter would later recall it as "the biggest event to happen in the South in my lifetime."Hattie McDaniel and the other black actors from the film were prevented from attending the premiere due to Georgia's Jim Crow laws, which would have kept them from sitting with the white members of the cast. Upon learning that McDaniel had been barred from the premiere, Clark Gable threatened to boycott the event. McDaniel convinced him to attend.[25]In Los Angeles, the film had its premiere at the elegant Carthay Circle Theatre. From December 1939 to June 1940, the film played only advance-ticket road show engagements at a limited number of theaters, before it went into general release in 1941.[26] It was a sensational hit during the Blitz in London, opening in April 1940, and played for four years.[27] It replaced The Birth of a Nation as the highest-grossing film of all-time,[28] holding the position until 1966, when it was finally overtaken by The Sound of Music.[29]Gone with the Wind was given theatrical re-releases in 1947, 1954, and 1961. The 1961 release commemorated the 100th anniversary of the start of the Civil War, and included a gala "premiere" at the Loew's Grand Theater. Gable had died months before, but other stars from the film attended. It was re-released in 1967 in a 70mm stereophonic version, which is best known today for its iconic poster.[30][31] It was further rereleased in 1971, by United Artists in 1974, by Turner Entertainment and MGM/UA Communications Co. in 1989, and by New Line Cinema in 1998. The 1954 release was the first time the studio issued the film in widescreen, compromising the original Academy ratio and cropping the top and bottom to an aspect ratio of 1.75:1. In doing so, a number of shots were optically re-framed and cut into the three-strip camera negatives, forever altering five shots in the film.[32] The 70mm re-issue of the film cropped the film further, to a very narrow ratio of 2.20:1. The 1998 theatrical reissue and the VHS and DVD releases restored the film to its original aspect ratio. On November 14, 2009, on the occasion of the film's 70th anniversary, the film was re-issued in a new high definition transfer to the Blu-ray format.[33]The film has made $400 million worldwide in theater receipts since its release,[34] which Turner Entertainment estimate to be equivalent to approximately $3.3 billion when adjusted to 2007 prices.[35] Other estimates place the adjusted gross between $3 billion and $5.3 billion at contemporary price levels, making it the highest grossing film of all time.[36][37][38] After adjustments for inflation, Gone with the Wind is also estimated to be the highest grossing film of all time in the United States[39][40] and the United Kingdom, where it is estimated to have sold a total of 35 million tickets.[41][42]The film made its television debut on the HBO cable network in June 1976, and its broadcast TV debut in November of that year in two parts on NBC, where it became at that time the highest-rated television program ever presented on a single network, watched by 47.5 percent of the households sampled in America, and 65 percent of television viewers. Ironically, it was surpassed the following year by the mini-series Roots, a saga about slavery in America. The film was later shown on CBS. The film was also used to launch two cable channels owned by Turner Broadcasting: TNT and Turner Classic Movies.Rumors of Hollywood producing a sequel persisted for decades until 1994, when one was finally produced for television. It was based upon Alexandra Ripley's novel Scarlett, itself a sequel to Mitchell's book. Both the book and the mini-series were met with mixed reviews. In the TV version, British actors played both key roles: Welsh-born actor Timothy Dalton played Rhett while Manchester-born Joanne Whalley played Scarlett. Original plans were used for the reconstruction of a replica of the original Tara set in Charleston, South Carolina for the filming.In an attempt to draw upon his company's profits, but to pay capital gain tax rather than a much higher personal income tax, David O. Selznick and his business partners liquidated Selznick International Pictures over a three-year period in the early 1940s. As part of the liquidation, Selznick sold his rights in Gone with the Wind to Jock Whitney and his sister, who in turn sold it to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in 1944. Today it is owned by Turner Entertainment, whose parent company Turner Broadcasting acquired MGM's film library in 1986. Turner itself is currently a subsidiary of Time Warner, which is the current parent company of Warner Bros. Entertainment. The film is the favorite movie of TBS founder Ted Turner, himself a resident of Atlanta.In 1989, Gone with the Wind was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 1998, the American Film Institute ranked it No. 4 on its "100 Greatest Movies" list. In 2007, the film had moved to No. 6 on the 10th anniversay AFI best film list.Rhett Butler's famous farewell line to Scarlett O'Hara, "Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn", was voted in a poll by the American Film Institute in 2005 as the most memorable line in cinema history.[43]Leslie Howard's association to the screen character he most disliked, the winsome Ashley, later obscured his solid contribution to the British film industry and his fight to break the silence about the Holocaust.[44]In 2005, the AFI ranked Max Steiner's score for the film the second greatest of all time. The AFI also ranked the film No. 2 in their list of the greatest romances of all time (100 Years... 100 Passions).After filming concluded, the set of Tara sat on the back lot of the former Selznick Studios as the Forty Acres back lot reverted to RKO Pictures and then was sold to Desilu Productions. In 1959, Southern Attractions, Inc. purchased the faade of Tara, which was dismantled and shipped to Georgia with plans to relocate it to the Atlanta area as a tourist attraction.[45][46] David O. Selznick commented at the time,Nothing in Hollywood is permanent. Once photographed, life here is ended. It is almost symbolic of Hollywood. Tara had no rooms inside. It was just a faade. So much of Hollywood is a faade.[47]However, the Margaret Mitchell estate refused to license the novel's commercial use in connection with the faade, citing Mitchell's dismay at how little it resembled her description. In 1979 the dismantled plywood and papier-mch set, reportedly in "terrible" condition, was purchased for $5,000 by Betty Talmadge, the ex-wife of former Georgia governor and U.S. senator Herman Talmadge. She lent the front door of Tara's set to the Margaret Mitchell House and Museum in downtown Atlanta, Georgia where it is on permanent display, featured in the Gone with the Wind film museum. Other items from the movie, such as from the set of Scarlett and Rhett's Atlanta mansion, are still stored at The Culver Studios (formerly Selznick International) including the stained glass window from the top of the staircase which was actually a painting. The famous painting of Scarlett in her blue dress, which hung in Rhett's bedroom, hung for years at the Margaret Mitchell Elementary School in Atlanta, but is now on permanent loan to the Margaret Mitchell Museum, complete with stains from the glass of sherry that Clark Gable, as Rhett Butler, threw at it in anger.Gone With the Wind received positive reviews at the time of its release, today being considered a classic. In its original review for the 1939 release, Frank S Nuget from the New York Times praised it, especially the casting, writing that "Mr. Selznick's film is a handsome, scrupulous and unstinting version of the 1,037-page novel, matching it almost scene for scene with a literalness that not even Shakespeare or Dickens were accorded in Hollywood, casting it so brilliantly one would have to know the history of the production not to suspect that Miss Mitchell had written her story just to provide a vehicle for the stars already assembled under Mr. Selznick's hospitable roof."[48] The Manchester Guardian, in 1940, criticized the length, but praised it overall, especially the acting.[49]With the 1998 restoration, Roger Ebert wrote that: "it will be around for years to come, a superb example of Hollywood's art and a time capsule of weathering sentimentality for a Civilization gone with the wind, all right--gone, but not forgotten."[50]Recent historical studies of the Civil Rights Movement have focused on the idyllic portrayal (epitomized in the opening credits) of the Civil War-era South in the film. Professor D.J. Reynolds wrote that "The white women are elegant, their menfolk noble or at least dashing. And, in the background, the black slaves are mostly dutiful and content, clearly incapable of an independent existence." Reynolds likened Gone with the Wind to Birth of a Nation (based on The Clansman) and other re-imaginings of the South during the era of segregation, in which white Southerners are portrayed as defending traditional values and the issue of slavery is largely ignored. Hattie McDaniel's performance (for which she became the first black American to win an Oscar) and Butterfly McQueen's have been described as stereotypes of a 'black Mammy' and a childlike black slave (in the novel, the character of Prissy was twelve years old, but played in the film by an adult). Malcolm X recalled that "when Butterfly McQueen went into her act, I felt like crawling under the rug."[51]Gone with the Wind was the first film to get more than five Academy Awards. Of the 17 competitive awards which were given at the time, Gone with the Wind had 13 nominations. It also was awarded the Greatest Film in History by the program Best In Film: The Greatest Films of Our Time, which aired March 22, 2011.It was the winner of ten Academy Awards (eight regular, one honorary, one technical).[52]
American Film Institute listsBest Actress and Best Supporting ActressVictor FlemingUncredited:George CukorSam WoodClark GableVivien LeighLeslie HowardOlivia de HavillandHattie McDanielButterfly McQueenErnest HallerLee Garmes (uncredited)Hal C. KernJames E. NewcomMetro-Goldwyn-Mayer (original)Warner Bros. (current)December 15, 1939(1939-12-15) (Atlanta premiere)January 17, 1940(1940-01-17) (United States)224 minutes238 minutes (with overture, entr'acte, and exit music)1 Plot

1.1 Part 1
1.2 Part 2

1.1 Part 11.2 Part 22 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Casting
3.3 Screenplay
3.4 Filming
3.5 Music

3.1 Development3.2 Casting3.3 Screenplay3.4 Filming3.5 Music4 Release

4.1 Later releases
4.2 Television
4.3 Sequel

4.1 Later releases4.2 Television4.3 Sequel5 Legacy6 Reception

6.1 Racial criticism
6.2 Awards and honors

6.1 Racial criticism6.2 Awards and honors7 References8 External links1.1 Part 11.2 Part 23.1 Development3.2 Casting3.3 Screenplay3.4 Filming3.5 Music4.1 Later releases4.2 Television4.3 Sequel6.1 Racial criticism6.2 Awards and honorsVivien Leigh as Scarlett O'HaraClark Gable as Rhett ButlerLeslie Howard as Ashley WilkesOlivia de Havilland as Melanie HamiltonHattie McDaniel as MammyButterfly McQueen as PrissyThomas Mitchell as Gerald O'HaraBarbara O'Neil as Ellen O'HaraEvelyn Keyes as Suellen O'HaraAnn Rutherford as Carreen O'HaraGeorge Reeves as Stuart TarletonFred Crane as Brent TarletonOscar Polk as PorkVictor Jory as Jonas WilkersonHoward Hickman as John WilkesAlicia Rhett as India WilkesRand Brooks as Charles HamiltonCarroll Nye as Frank KennedyLaura Hope Crews as Aunt PittypatEddie Anderson as Uncle PeterHarry Davenport as Dr. MeadeJane Darwell as Mrs. MerriwetherMary Anderson as Maybelle MerriweatherOna Munson as Belle WatlingWard Bond as Tom, Yankee CaptainCammie King as Bonnie Blue ButlerMickey Kuhn as Beau WilkesPaul Hurst as Yankee deserterIsabel Jewell as Emmie SlatteryYakima Canutt as Shantytown renegadeCliff Edwards as voice of unseen Reminiscent SoldierOverture  MGM Studio OrchestraMain Title  Tara's ThemeRhett's ThemeAshleyScarlettAshley and Melanie Love ThemeTrue Love"(I Wish I Was in) Dixie's Land" (1860) (uncredited)"Katie Belle" (uncredited)"Under the Willow She's Sleeping" (1860) (uncredited)"Lou'siana Belle" (1847) (uncredited)"Dolly Day" (1850) (uncredited)"Ring de Banjo" (1851) (uncredited)"Sweet and Low" (1865) (uncredited)"Ye Cavaliers of Dixie" (uncredited)"Taps" (1862) (uncredited)"Massa's in de Cold Ground" (1852) (uncredited)"Maryland, My Maryland" (1861) (uncredited)"Irish Washerwoman" (uncredited)"Garryowen" (uncredited)"When Johnny Comes Marching Home" (1863) (uncredited)"Weeping, Sad and Lonely (When This Cruel War Is Over)" (1862)"The Bonnie Blue Flag" (1861) (uncredited)"Hark! The Herald Angels Sing" (pub. 1856) (uncredited)"Tramp! Tramp! Tramp! (The Boys Are Marching)" (1864) (uncredited)"The Old Folks at Home (Swanee River)" (1851) (uncredited)"Go Down Moses (Let My People Go)" (uncredited)"My Old Kentucky Home" (1853) (uncredited)"Marching Through Georgia" (1865) (uncredited)"The Battle Hymn of the Republic" (circa 1856) (uncredited)"Beautiful Dreamer" (1862) (uncredited)"Jeanie with the Light Brown Hair" (1854) (uncredited)"Yankee Doodle" (ca. 1755) (uncredited)"Stars of the Summer Night" (1856) (uncredited)"Bridal Chorus (Here Comes the Bride)" (1850) (uncredited)"Deep River" (uncredited)"For He's a Jolly Good Fellow" (uncredited)"London Bridge Is Falling Down" (uncredited)"Ben Bolt (Oh Don't You Remember)" (1848) (uncredited)AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  #4AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions  #2AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn."#1
"After all, tomorrow is another day!"#31
"As God is my witness, I'll never be hungry again."#59

"Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn."#1"After all, tomorrow is another day!"#31"As God is my witness, I'll never be hungry again."#59AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores#2AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers#43AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)#6AFI's 10 Top 10#4 Epic film"Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn."#1"After all, tomorrow is another day!"#31"As God is my witness, I'll never be hungry again."#59Bridges, Herb (1998). The Filming of Gone with the Wind. Mercer University Press. ISBN 0-86554-621-5.Bridges, Herb (1999). Gone with the Wind: The Three-Day Premiere in Atlanta. Mercer University Press. ISBN 0-86554-672-X.Brown, Ellen F. and John Wiley (2011). Margaret Mitchell's Gone With the Wind: A Bestseller's Odyssey from Atlanta to Hollywood. Lanham: Taylor Trade. ISBN 978-1-58979-567-9Cameron, Judy; Christman, Paul J. (1989). The Art of Gone with the Wind: The Making of a Legend. Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-046740-5.Harmetz, Aljean (1996). On the Road to Tara: The Making of Gone with the Wind. New York: Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 0-8109-3684-4.Lambert, Gavin (1973). GWTW: The Making of Gone With the Wind. New York: Little, Brown and Company.Myrick, Susan (1982). White Columns in Hollywood: Reports from the GWTW Sets. Mercer University Press. ISBN 0-86554-245-7.Pratt, William. (1977). Scarlett Fever: The Ultimate Pictorial Treasury of Gone with the Wind. Macmillan. ISBN 0-02-012510-0.Vertrees, Alan David (1997). Selznick's Vision: Gone with the Wind and Hollywood Filmmaking. University of Texas Press. ISBN 0-292-78729-4.Gone with the Wind at the Internet Movie DatabaseGone with the Wind at the TCM Movie DatabaseGone with the Wind at AllRoviGone with the Wind at Box Office MojoGone with the Wind at Rotten TomatoesGone with the Wind wardrobe, an online exhibition from the David O. Selznick collection at the Harry Ransom CenterFilm Stills Photo ArchiveGone with the Wind on DVD at Warner Home VideoLiterature on Gone with the WindGone With the Wind Fan-SiteUnited KingdomLawrence of Arabia is a 1962 British epic film based on the life of T. E. Lawrence. It was directed by David Lean and produced by Sam Spiegel through his British company, Horizon Pictures, with the screenplay by Robert Bolt and Michael Wilson. The film stars Peter O'Toole in the title role. It is widely considered one of the greatest and most influential films in the history of cinema. The dramatic score by Maurice Jarre and the Super Panavision 70 cinematography by Freddie Young are also highly acclaimed. The film also leaves open to debate the on-going discussion regarding Lawrence's sexuality. As an English officer, Lawrence battled the stigma associated with homosexuality during the early part of the 20th century.The film depicts Lawrence's experiences in Arabia during World War I, in particular his attacks on Aqaba and Damascus and his involvement in the Arab National Council. Its themes include Lawrence's emotional struggles with the personal violence inherent in war, his personal identity, and his divided allegiance between his native Britain and its army and his newfound comrades within the Arabian desert tribes.The film is presented in two parts, separated by an intermission.In 1935, T. E. Lawrence (Peter O'Toole) is killed in a motorcycle accident. At his memorial service at St Paul's Cathedral, reporters try to gain insights into this remarkable, enigmatic man from those who knew him, with little success.During the First World War, Lawrence is a misfit British Army lieutenant stationed in Cairo, notable for his insolence and knowledge. Over the objections of General Murray (Donald Wolfit), he is sent by Mr. Dryden (Claude Rains) of the Arab Bureau to assess the prospects of Prince Faisal (Alec Guinness) in his revolt against the Turks.On the journey, his Bedouin guide is killed by Sherif Ali (Omar Sharif) for drinking from a well without permission. Lawrence later meets Colonel Brighton (Anthony Quayle), who orders him to keep quiet, make his assessment of Faisal's camp, and leave. Lawrence promptly ignores Brighton's commands when he meets Faisal. His knowledge and outspokenness pique the Prince's interest.Brighton advises Faisal to retreat after a major defeat, but Lawrence proposes a daring surprise attack on Aqaba which, if successful, would provide a port from which the British could offload much-needed supplies. While strongly fortified against a naval assault, the town is lightly defended on the landward side. He convinces Faisal to provide fifty men, led by a sceptical Sherif Ali. Two teenage orphans, Daud (John Dimech) and Farraj (Michel Ray), attach themselves to Lawrence as his servants.They cross the Nefud Desert, considered impassable even by the Bedouins, travelling day and night on the last stage to reach water. Gasim (I. S. Johar) succumbs to fatigue and falls off his camel unnoticed during the night. The rest make it to an oasis, but Lawrence turns back for the lost man. Sherif Ali, won over, burns Lawrence's British uniform and gives him Arab robes to wear.Lawrence persuades Auda abu Tayi (Anthony Quinn), the leader of the powerful local Howeitat tribe, to turn against the Turks. Lawrence's plan is almost derailed when one of Ali's men kills one of Auda's because of a blood feud. Since Howeitat retaliation would shatter the fragile alliance, Lawrence declares that he will execute the murderer himself. Stunned to discover that the culprit is Gasim, he shoots him anyway. The next morning, the intact alliance overruns the Turkish garrison.Lawrence heads to Cairo to inform Dryden and the new commander, General Allenby (Jack Hawkins), of his victory. During the crossing of the Sinai Desert, Daud dies when he stumbles into quicksand. Lawrence is promoted to major and given arms and money to support the Arabs. He is deeply disturbed, confessing that he enjoyed executing Gasim, but Allenby brushes aside his qualms. He asks Allenby whether there is any basis for the Arabs' suspicions that the British have designs on Arabia. Pressed, the general states they have no such designs.Lawrence launches a guerrilla war, blowing up trains and harassing the Turks at every turn. American war correspondent Jackson Bentley (Arthur Kennedy) publicises his exploits, making him world famous. On one raid, Farraj is badly injured. Unwilling to leave him to be tortured, Lawrence is forced to shoot him before fleeing.When Lawrence scouts the enemy-held city of Daraa with Ali, he is taken, along with several Arab residents, to the Turkish Bey (Jos Ferrer). Lawrence is stripped, ogled and prodded. For striking out at the Bey, he is severely flogged, then thrown out into the street. Lawrence is so traumatised by the experience that he abandons all of his exploits, going from having proclaimed himself a god, to insisting he is merely a man. He attempts to return to the British forces and swear off the desert, but he never fits in there. In Jerusalem, Allenby urges him to support his "big push" on Damascus, but Lawrence is a changed, tormented man, unwilling to return. After Allenby insists that Lawrence has a destiny, he finally relents. Lawrence naively believes that the warriors will come for him rather than for money.He recruits an army, mainly killers, mercenaries, and cutthroats motivated by money, rather than the Arab cause. They sight a column of retreating Turkish soldiers who have just slaughtered the people of the village of Tafas. One of Lawrence's men from the village demands, "No prisoners!" When Lawrence hesitates, the man charges the Turks alone and is killed. Lawrence takes up the dead man's cry, resulting in a massacre in which Lawrence himself participates with relish. Afterward, he realises the horrible consequences of what he has done.His men then take Damascus ahead of Allenby's forces. The Arabs set up a council to administer the city, but they are desert tribesmen, ill-suited for such a task. The various tribes argue among themselves and in spite of Lawrence's insistence, cannot unite against the English, who in the end take the city back under their bureaucracy. Unable to maintain the utilities and bickering constantly with each other, they soon abandon most of the city to the British. Promoted to colonel and immediately ordered home, his usefulness at an end to both Faisal and the British diplomats, a dejected Lawrence is driven away in a staff car.Various members of the film's crew portrayed minor characters. First assistant director Roy Stevens played the truck driver who transports Lawrence and Farraj to the Cairo HQ at the end of Act I; the Sergeant who stops Lawrence and Farraj ("Where do you think you're going to, Mustapha?") is construction assistant, Fred Bennett; and screenwriter Robert Bolt has a wordless cameo as one of the officers watching Allenby and Lawrence confer in the courtyard (he is smoking a pipe). David Lean can be heard as the voice of the motorcycle driver asking Lawrence "Who are you?" at the Suez Canal.The film is unusual in that it has no women in credited speaking roles.The historical accuracy of the film, and particularly its portrayal of Lawrence himself, has been called into question by numerous scholars.[who?] Most of the film's characters are either real or based on real characters to varying degrees. The events depicted in the film are largely based on accepted historical fact and Lawrence's own writing about events, though they have various degrees of romanticisation.Some scenessuch as the attack on Aqabawere heavily fictionalised, while those dealing with the Arab Council were inaccurate, inasmuch as the council remained more or less in power in Syria until France deposed Faisal in 1920. Little background on the history of the region, the First World War, and the Arab Revolt is provided, probably due to Bolt's increased focus on Lawrence (while Wilson's draft script had a broader, more politicised version of events). The theme (in the second half of the film) that Lawrence's Arab army deserted almost to a man as he moved farther north was completely fictional. The film's timeline of the Arab Revolt and World War I, and the geography of the Hejaz region, are frequently questionable. For instance, Bentley interviews Faisal in late 1917, after the fall of Aqaba, saying the United States has not yet entered the war, yet America had been in the war for several months by that point in time. Further, Lawrence's involvement in the Arab Revolt prior to the attack on Aqabasuch as his involvement in the seizures of Yenbo and Wejhis completely excised. The rescue and execution of Gasim is based on two separate incidents, which were conflated together for dramatic reasons. The film shows Lawrence representing the Allied cause in the Hejaz almost alone with only one British officer, Colonel Brighton (Anthony Quayle) there to assist him. In fact, there were numerous British officers such as Colonel Cyril Wilson, Stewart Francis Newcombe and Colonel Pierce C. Joyce, all of whom arrived before Lawrence serving in Arabia.[7] In addition, there was a French military mission led by Colonel Edouard Brmond serving in the Hejaz, of which no mention is made in the film.[8] The film shows Lawrence as the sole originator of the attacks on the Hejaz railroad. The first attacks on the Hejaz railroad began in early January 1917 led by officers such as Newcombe.[9] The first successful attack on the Hejaz railroad with a locomotive-destroying "Garland mine" was led by Major H. Garland in February 1917, a month before Lawrence's first attack on the railroad in March 1917.[10] The film shows the Hashemite forces as comprising Bedouin guerrillas, whereas in fact the core of the Hashemite forces was the Regular Arab Army recruited from Ottoman Arab POWs, who wore British-style uniforms with keffiyahs and fought in conventional battles.[11] The film makes no mention of the Sharifian Army, and leaves the viewer with the impression that the Hashemite forces were composed exclusively of Bedouin irregulars.Many complaints about the film's accuracy, however, centre on the characterisation of Lawrence himself. The perceived problems with the portrayal of Lawrence begin with the differences in his physical appearance: the 6-foot 2-inch (1.87 m) Peter O'Toole was almost nine inches (23cm) taller than the real Lawrence.[citation needed] His behaviour, however, has caused much more debate.The screenwriters depict Lawrence as an egotist. The degree to which Lawrence sought or shunned attention, such as his use after the war of various assumed names, is a matter of debate. Even during the war, Lowell Thomas wrote in With Lawrence in Arabia that he could take pictures of him only by tricking him, although Lawrence did later agree to pose for several pictures for Thomas's stage show. Thomas's famous comment that Lawrence "had a genius for backing into the limelight" referred to the fact that his extraordinary actions prevented him from being as private as he would have liked. Others disagree, pointing to Lawrence's own writings in Seven Pillars of Wisdom to support the argument that he was egotistical.Lawrence's sexual orientation remains a controversial topic amongst historians; though Bolt's primary source was ostensibly Seven Pillars, the film's portrayal seems informed by Richard Aldington's then-recent Biographical Inquiry (1955), which posited among other things that Lawrence was homosexual. The film features Lawrence's alleged sadomasochism as a major part of his character (for instance, his "match trick" in Cairo, his "enjoyment" of killing Gasim); while Lawrence almost certainly engaged in flagellation and like activities after the Deraa incident, there is no biographical evidence he was a masochist prior to that incident. The film's depiction of Lawrence as an active participant in the Tafas Massacre was disputed at the time by historians, including Lawrence's biographer Basil Liddell Hart, but most current biographers accept the film's portrayal of the massacre as reasonably accurate.Although the film does show that Lawrence could speak and read Arabic, could quote the Quran, and was reasonably knowledgeable about the region, it barely mentions his archaeological travels from 1911 to 1914 in Syria and Arabia, and ignores his espionage work, including a pre-war topographical survey of the Sinai Peninsula and his attempts to negotiate the release of British prisoners at Kut in Mesopotamia in 1916.Furthermore, in the film, Lawrence is only made aware of the SykesPicot Agreement very late in the story and is shown to be appalled by it whereas the "real" Lawrence, while fighting alongside the Arabs, knew about it much earlier.[12]Lawrence's biographers have had a mixed reaction towards the film. Authorised biographer Jeremy Wilson noted that the film has "undoubtedly influenced the perceptions of some subsequent biographers" such as the depiction of the film's Ali as the real Sherif Ali, rather than a composite character, and also the highlighting of the Deraa incident.[13] (In fairness to Lean and his writers, the Deraa connection was made by several Lawrence biographers, including Edward Robinson (Lawrence the Rebel) and Anthony Nutting (The Man and the Motive) before the film's release.) The film's historical inaccuracies are, in Wilson's view, more troublesome than what can be allowed under normal dramatic license. Contemporary biographer Basil Liddell Hart publicly criticised the film, engaging screenwriter Robert Bolt in a lengthy correspondence over the film's portrayal of Lawrence.[14]The film portrays General Allenby as cynical and manipulative, with a superior attitude to Lawrence, but there is much evidence that Allenby and Lawrence respected and liked each other. Lawrence once said that Allenby was "an admiration of mine"[15] and later that he was "physically large and confident and morally so great that the comprehension of our littleness came slow to him".[16] In contrast to the fictional Allenby's words at Lawrence's funeral in the film, upon Lawrence's death Allenby remarked, "I have lost a good friend and a valued comrade. Lawrence was under my command, but, after acquainting him with my strategical plan, I gave him a free hand. His co-operation was marked by the utmost loyalty, and I never had anything but praise for his work, which, indeed, was invaluable throughout the campaign."[17] Allenby also spoke highly of him on numerous other occasions, and much to Lawrence's delight, publicly endorsed the accuracy of Seven Pillars of Wisdom. Although Allenby did manipulate Lawrence during the war, their relationship lasted for years after its end, indicating that in real-life they were friendly, if not close. The Allenby family was particularly upset by the Damascus scenes, where Allenby coldly allows the town to fall into chaos as the Arab Council collapses.[18]Similarly, General Murray, though initially sceptical of the Arab Revolt's potential, thought highly of Lawrence's abilities as an intelligence officer; indeed, it was largely through Lawrence's persuasion that Murray came to support the revolt. The intense dislike shown toward Lawrence in the film is in fact the opposite of Murray's real feelings, although for his part Lawrence seemed not to hold Murray in any high regard.The depiction of Auda abu Tayi as a man interested only in loot and money is also at odds with the historical record. Although Auda did at first join the Arab Revolt for monetary reasons, he quickly became a steadfast supporter of Arab independence. Notably after Aqaba's capture, he refused repeated bribery attempts by the Turks (though he happily pocketed their money) and remained loyal to the Revolt. He was present with Lawrence from the beginning of the Aqaba expedition and in fact helped plan it along with Lawrence and Prince Faisal.Faisal, far from being the middle-aged man depicted, was in reality in his early thirties at the time of the revolt. Faisal and Lawrence respected each others' capabilities and intelligence. They worked well together.[19]A particularly telling fact of the film's inaccuracies is the reaction of those who knew Lawrence and the other characters. The most vehement critic of the film's inaccuracy was Professor A.W.(Arnold) Lawrence, T.E.'s younger brother and literary executor, who had sold the rights to Seven Pillars of Wisdom to Sam Spiegel for 25,000. Arnold went on a campaign in the United States and Britain denouncing the film, famously saying, "I should not have recognised my own brother". In one pointed talk show appearance, Arnold remarked that he had found the film pretentious and false." He went on to say that his brother was "one of the nicest, kindest and most exhilarating people Ive known. He often appeared cheerful when he was unhappy. Later, to the New York Times, Arnold said, [The film is] a psychological recipe. Take an ounce of narcissism, a pound of exhibitionism, a pint of sadism, a gallon of blood-lust and a sprinkle of other aberrations and stir well. Lowell Thomas was also critical of the portrayal of Lawrence and most of the film's characters, believing that the train attack scenes were the only reasonably accurate aspect of the film.The criticisms were not restricted to Lawrence. The Allenby family lodged a formal complaint against Columbia about the portrayal of their ancestor. Descendants of Auda abu Tayi and the real Sherif Ali, despite the fact that the film's Ali was fictional, went further, actively suing Columbia due to the portrayal of their ancestors. The Auda case went on for almost ten years before it was finally dropped.[20]Biographer Michael Korda, author of Hero: The Life and Legend of Lawrence of Arabia, offers a different opinion. While the film is neither "the full story of Lawrence's life or a completely accurate account of the two years he spent fighting with the Arabs," Korda argues that criticising its inaccuracy "misses the point": "The object was to produce, not a faithful docudrama that would educate the audience, but a hit picture."[21] Stephen E. Tabachnick goes further than Korda, arguing that the film's portrayal of Lawrence is "appropriate and true to the text of Seven Pillars of Wisdom."[22] The British historian of the Arab Revolt, David Murphy wrote that though the film was flawed due to various inaccuracies and omissions, "it was a truly epic movie and is rightly seen as a classic".[23]Previous films about T. E. Lawrence had been planned but had not been made. In the 1940s, Alexander Korda was interested in filming The Seven Pillars of Wisdom with either Laurence Olivier, Leslie Howard or Robert Donat as Lawrence, but had to pull out due to financial difficulties. David Lean himself had been approached to direct a 1952 version for the Rank Organisation, but the project fell through. Also, at the same time as pre-production of the film, Terence Rattigan was developing his play Ross which centred primarily on Lawrence's alleged homosexuality. Ross had begun life as a screenplay, but was re-written for the stage when the film project fell through. Sam Spiegel grew furious and unsuccessfully attempted to have the play suppressed, furore at which helped to gain publicity for the film.[24] Dirk Bogarde had accepted the role in Ross; he described the cancellation of the project as "my bitterest disappointment". Alec Guinness would play the role on stage.Lean and Sam Spiegel were coming off the huge success of The Bridge on the River Kwai, and were eager to work together again. For a time, Lean was interested in a biopic of Gandhi, with Alec Guinness to play the title role and Emeric Pressburger writing the screenplay. Despite extensive pre-production work (including location scouting in India and a meeting with Jawaharlal Nehru), Lean eventually lost interest in the project.[25] Lean then returned his attention to T.E. Lawrence. Columbia Pictures had an interest in a Lawrence project dating back to the early '50s, and when Spiegel convinced a reluctant A.W. Lawrence to sell the rights to The Seven Pillars of Wisdom for 25,000, the project got underway.When Lawrence of Arabia was first announced, Lawrence's biographer Lowell Thomas offered producer Spiegel and screenwriters Bolt and Wilson a large amount of research material he had produced on Lawrence during and after his time with him in the Arab Revolt. Spiegel rejected the offer.[citation needed]Michael Wilson wrote the original draft of the screenplay. However, Lean was dissatisfied with Wilson's work, primarily because his treatment had a clear focus on the historical and political aspects of the Arab Revolt. Lean hired Robert Bolt to re-write the script in order to make it a character study of Lawrence himself. While many of the characters and scenes are Wilson's invention, virtually all of the dialogue in the finished film was written by Bolt.Lean reportedly watched John Ford's film The Searchers (1956) to help him develop ideas as to how to shoot the film. Several scenes in the film directly recall Ford's film, most notably Ali's entrance at the well and the composition of many of the desert scenes and the dramatic exit from Wadi Rum. Lean biographer Kevin Brownlow even notes the physical similarity between Rumm and Ford's Monument Valley.[26] The film's plot structure also bears similarity to Orson Welles's Citizen Kane (1941), particularly the opening scenes with Lawrence's death and the reporter inquiring notables at Lawrence's funeral.The film was made by Horizon Pictures and Columbia Pictures. Shooting began on 15 May 1961 and ended on 20 October 1962.The desert scenes were shot in Jordan and Morocco, as well as Almera and Doana in Spain. The film was originally to be filmed entirely in Jordan: the government of King Hussein was extremely helpful in providing logistical assistance, location scouting, transportation, and extras; Hussein himself visited the set several times during production and maintained cordial relationships with cast and crew. During the production of the film, Hussein met and married Toni Gardner, who was working as a switchboard operator in Aqaba. The only tension occurred when Jordanian officials learned that English actor Henry Oscar, who did not speak Arabic, would be filmed reciting the Qur'an; permission was granted only on condition that an imam be present to ensure that there were no misquotations.In Jordan, Lean planned to film in the real Aqaba and the archaeological site at Petra, which Lawrence had been fond of as a place of study. However, the production had to be moved to Spain, much to Lean's regret, due to cost and outbreaks of illness among the cast and crew before these scenes could be shot. The attack on Aqaba (one of the more stirring and memorable scenes in the film, with a spectacular pan shot of dust rising up from behind the charging Arabs while Turkish cannons are aimed harmlessly out to sea) was reconstructed in a dried river bed in southern Spain (at 37125N 15253W / 37.02361N 1.88139W / 37.02361; -1.88139); it consisted of over 300 buildings and was meticulously based on the town's appearance in 1917. The execution of Gasim, the train attacks and Deraa exteriors were filmed in the Almera region, with the former's filming being delayed because of a flash flood. The Sierra Nevada mountains filled in for Azrak, Lawrence's winter quarters. The city of Seville was used to represent Cairo, Jerusalem and Damascus, with the appearance of Casa de Pilatos, the Alczar of Seville and the Plaza de Espaa. All of the interiors were shot in Spain, including Lawrence's first meeting with Faisal and the scene in Auda's tent.The Tafas massacre was filmed in Ouarzazate, Morocco, with Moroccan army troops substituting for the Turkish army; however, Lean could not film as much as he wanted because the soldiers were uncooperative and impatient.[27] One of the second-unit directors for the Morocco scenes was Andr de Toth, who suggested a shot wherein bags of blood would be machine-gunned, spraying the screen with blood. Assistant director Nicolas Roeg approached Lean with this idea, but Lean found it disgusting. De Toth subsequently left the project.The film's production was frequently delayed because, unusually, the film started shooting without a finished script. After Wilson quit early in the production, playwright Beverley Cross worked on the script in the interim before Bolt took over, although none of Cross's material made it to the final film. A further mishap occurred when Bolt was arrested for taking part in an anti-nuclear weapons demonstration, and Spiegel had to persuade Bolt to sign a recognizance of good behaviour for him to be released from jail and continue working on the script.Camels caused several problems on set. O'Toole was not used to riding camels and found the saddle to be uncomfortable. While in Amman during a break in filming, he bought a piece of foam rubber at a market and added it to his saddle. Many of the extras copied the idea and sheets of the foam can be seen on many of the horse and camel saddles. The Bedouins nicknamed O'Toole "'Ab al-'Isfanjah" ( ), meaning "Father of the Sponge".[28] The idea spread and to this day, many Bedouins add foam rubber to their saddles.Later, during the filming of the Aqaba scene, O'Toole was nearly killed when he fell from his camel, but fortunately, it stood over him, preventing the horses of the extras from trampling him. Coincidentally a very similar mishap befell the real Lawrence at the Battle of Abu El Lissal in 1917. In another mishap, O'Toole seriously injured his hand during filming by punching through the window of a caravan while drunk. A brace or bandage can be seen on his left thumb during the first train attack scene, presumably due to this incident.Along with many other Arab countries, Jordan would ban the film for what they felt to be a disrespectful portrayal of Arab culture. Egypt, Omar Sharif's home country, was the only Arab nation to give the film a wide release, where it became a success through the endorsement of President Gamal Abdel Nasser, who appreciated the film's depiction of Arab nationalism.The score was composed by Maurice Jarre, little known at the time and selected only after both William Walton and Malcolm Arnold had proved unavailable. Jarre was given just six weeks to compose two hours of orchestral music for Lawrence.[29] The score was performed by the London Philharmonic Orchestra. Although Sir Adrian Boult is credited as the conductor of the score in the film's credits, he could not conduct most of the score, due in part to his failure to adapt to the intricate timings of each cue, and Jarre replaced him as the conductor. The score went on to garner Jarre his first Academy Award for Music ScoreSubstantially Original[30] and is now considered one of the greatest scores of all time, ranking number three on the American Film Institute's top twenty-five American film scores.[31]The original soundtrack recording was originally released on Colpix Records, the records division of Columbia Pictures, in 1962. A remastered edition appeared on Castle Music, a division of the Sanctuary Records Group, on 28 August 2006.Kenneth Alford's march The Voice of the Guns (1917) is prominently featured on the soundtrack. One of Alford's other pieces, the Colonel Bogey March, was the musical theme for Lean's previous film, The Bridge on the River Kwai.The film premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on 10 December 1962 (Royal Premiere) and was released in the United States on 16 December 1962.The original release ran for about 222minutes (plus overture, intermission, and exit music). A post-premiere memo (13 Dec. 1962) noted that the film was 24,987.5ft (70mm) and 19,990ft (35mm). With 90ft of 35mm film projected every minute, this corresponds to exactly 222.11 minutes.In an email to Robert Morris, co-author of a book on Lawrence of Arabia, Richard May, VP Film Preservation at Warner Bros., noted that Gone With the Wind, never edited after its premiere, is 19,884ft of 35mm film (without leaders, overture, intermission, entr'acte or walkout music) corresponding to 220.93 min.Thus, Lawrence of Arabia, slightly more than 1 minute longer than Gone With the Wind, is the longest movie ever to win a Best Picture Oscar.In January 1963, Lawrence was released in a version edited by 20 minutes; when it was re-released in 1971, an even shorter cut of 187minutes was presented. The first round of cuts was made at the direction and even insistence of David Lean, to assuage criticisms of the film's length and increase the number of showings per day; however, during the 1989 restoration, he would later pass blame for the cuts onto by-then-deceased producer Sam Spiegel.[32] In addition, a 1966 print, used for initial television and video releases, accidentally altered a few scenes by reversing the image.[33]The film was screened out of competition at the 1989 Cannes Film Festival.[34] and at the 2012 Karlovy Vary International Film Festival.[35]The current "restored version", undertaken by Robert A. Harris and Jim Painten (under the supervision of director David Lean), was released in 1989 with a 216-minute length (plus overture, intermission, and exit music).Most of the cut scenes were dialogue sequences, particularly those involving General Allenby and his staff. Two whole scenesBrighton's briefing of Allenby in Jerusalem before the Daraa scene and the British staff meeting in the field tentwere completely excised, and the former has still not been entirely restored. Much of the missing dialogue involves Lawrence's writing of poetry and verse, alluded to by Allenby in particular, saying "the last poetry general we had was Wellington". The opening of Act II, where Faisal is interviewed by Bentley, and the later scene, in Jerusalem where Allenby convinces Lawrence not to resign, existed in only fragmented form; they were restored to the 1989 re-release. Some of the more graphic shots of the Tafas massacre scenethe lengthy panning shot of the corpses in Tafas, and Lawrence shooting a surrendering Turkish soldierwere also restored. Most of the still-missing footage is of minimal import, supplementing existing scenes. One scene is an extended version of the Daraa rape sequence, which makes Lawrence's punishment in that scene more overt. Other scripted scenes exist, including a conversation between Auda and Lawrence immediately after the fall of Aqaba, a brief scene of Turkish officers noting the extent of Lawrence's campaign, and the battle of Petra (later reworked into the first train attack), but these scenes were probably not filmed. The actors still living at the time of the re-release dubbed their own dialogue, though Jack Hawkins's dialogue had to be dubbed by Charles Gray (who had already done Hawkins' voice for several films after the former developed throat cancer in the late 1960s). A full list of cuts can be found at the Internet Movie Database.[36] Reasons for the cuts of various scenes can be found in Lean's notes to Sam Spiegel, Robert Bolt, and Anne V. Coates.[37] The film runs 216minutes in the most recent director's cut available on DVD.[citation needed]Lawrence of Arabia has been released in five different DVD editions, including an initial release as a two-disc set (2001), followed by a shorter single disc edition (2002), a high resolution version of the director's cut with restored scenes (2003) issued as part of the Superbit series, as part of the Columbia Best Pictures collection (2008), and in a fully restored special edition of the director's cut (2008).[38]Martin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg helped restore a version of the film for a DVD release in 2000.[39]An 8K scan/4K intermediate digital restoration was made for Blu-ray and theatrical re-release[40] during 2012 by Sony Pictures to celebrate the film's 50th anniversary.[41] The Blu-ray edition of the film was released in the United Kingdom on 10 September 2012 and in the United States on 13 November 2012.[42] The film received a one-day theatrical release on 4 October 2012 and a two-day release in Canada on 11 and 15 November 2012.According to Grover Crisp, executive VP of restoration at Sony Pictures, the new 8K scan has such high resolution that when examined, showed a series of fine concentric lines in a pattern reminiscent of a fingerprint near the top of the frame. This was caused by its melting in the desert heat when handled by the film workers during production. Sony had to hire a third party to minimise or eliminate the fingerprint artefacts in the new restored version.[43]A digital 4K screening of the new restored version was screened at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival[44][45], at the 2012 Karlovy Vary International Film Festival[35], and at the V Janela Internacional de Cinema[46], in Recife, Brazil.Upon its release, Lawrence was a huge critical and financial success and it remains popular among viewers and critics alike. The striking visuals, dramatic music, literate screenplay and superb performance by Peter O'Toole have all been common points of acclaim and the film as a whole is widely considered one of the greatest films ever made. Its visual style has influenced many directors, including George Lucas, Sam Peckinpah, Martin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg, who called the film a "miracle".[47]The film is regarded as a masterpiece of world cinema and is ranked highly on many lists of the best films ever made. The American Film Institute ranked the film 5th in its original and 7th in its updated list of the greatest films and first in its list of the greatest films of the "epic" genre.[48] In 1991, the film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. In 1999 the film placed third in a BFI poll of the best British films and in 2001 the magazine Total Film called it "as shockingly beautiful and hugely intelligent as any film ever made" and "faultless".[49] It has also ranked in the top ten films of all time in a Sight and Sound directors' poll. Additionally, O'Toole's performance has also often been considered one of the greatest of all time, topping lists made by both Entertainment Weekly and Premiere.However, some criticsnotably Bosley Crowther[50] and Andrew Sarris[51]have criticised the film for an indefinite portrayal of Lawrence and lack of depth.American Film Institute recognitionThe use of the locations in Almera, Spain for the train sequences and others made that region popular with international film makers. Most famously, it became the setting of virtually all of the Spaghetti Westerns of the '60s and '70s, specifically those of Sergio Leone. (The oasis set from Lawrence briefly appears in Leone's 1965 film For a Few Dollars More.)[citation needed] Many of the sets used or built for the film were re-used in later films, including John Milius's The Wind and the Lion (1975), which used several of the same palaces in Seville and the Aqaba set as the setting for its climactic battle, while the Plaza de Espaa appears in Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones (2002), as the Theed Palace.The main musical title of the film was used in the James Bond film The Spy Who Loved Me (1977) in the scene where Roger Moore and Barbara Bach's characters have to wander through the desert after their van breaks down. This was done as a joke by one of the editors who liked to play music from the film during the daily rushes.The main musical title of the film was also used in the 1987 science fiction parody film Spaceballs, when the Winnebago crashes on the sand planet and the crew is forced to walk the desert.Film director Steven Spielberg considers this his favorite film of all time and the one that convinced him to become a filmmaker.[53] Screenwriter William Monahan, who scripted Kingdom of Heaven and The Departed, among others, is a fan of Robert Bolt and has stated on numerous occasions that viewing Lawrence is what inspired him to be a screenwriter.The scene of Lawrence showing off the 'match trick' is shown, converted into 3D, in Ridley Scott's 2012 film Prometheus. A piece of viral marketing for the film starring Guy Pearce also references the scene, and Michael Fassbender's android character in the film models his looks and voice after O'Toole's in Lawrence of Arabia.In 1990, the made-for-television film A Dangerous Man: Lawrence After Arabia was produced as a sequel to the Lawrence of Arabia. It featured Ralph Fiennes as Lawrence and Alexander Siddig as Prince Faisal. The movie dealt primarily with the attempts of Lawrence and Faisal to secure independence for Arabia during the 1919 Versailles Conference following the end of World War I. A principal departure from the earlier film shows Faisal closer in age to Lawrence, and in a sometimes fraught role of friendship and collaboration with him - a clear echo of Lawrence's friendship with Sherif Ali in the original. The film was generally well received and deals more with the political ramifications of Lawrence's efforts in the Middle East.10 December 1962(1962-12-10)1 Plot summary

1.1 Part I
1.2 Part II

1.1 Part I1.2 Part II2 Cast

2.1 Nonfictional characters
2.2 Fictional characters

2.1 Nonfictional characters2.2 Fictional characters3 Historical accuracy

3.1 Representation of Lawrence
3.2 Representation of other characters

3.1 Representation of Lawrence3.2 Representation of other characters4 Production

4.1 Pre-production
4.2 Filming
4.3 Music

4.1 Pre-production4.2 Filming4.3 Music5 Release

5.1 Theatrical run
5.2 Restored director's cut
5.3 Home media
5.4 New restoration, Blu-ray and theatrical re-release

5.1 Theatrical run5.2 Restored director's cut5.3 Home media5.4 New restoration, Blu-ray and theatrical re-release6 Reception7 Awards and honours8 Legacy9 Sequel10 See also11 Notes12 References13 Further reading14 External links1.1 Part I1.2 Part II2.1 Nonfictional characters2.2 Fictional characters3.1 Representation of Lawrence3.2 Representation of other characters4.1 Pre-production4.2 Filming4.3 Music5.1 Theatrical run5.2 Restored director's cut5.3 Home media5.4 New restoration, Blu-ray and theatrical re-releasePeter O'Toole as Thomas Edward "T. E." Lawrence. Albert Finney, at the time a virtual unknown, was Lean's first choice to play Lawrence, but Finney was not sure the film would be a success and turned it down. Marlon Brando was also offered the part, and Anthony Perkins and Montgomery Clift were briefly considered, before O'Toole was cast.[1] Alec Guinness had previously played Lawrence in the play Ross, and was briefly considered for the part, but David Lean and Sam Spiegel thought him too old. Lean had seen O'Toole in The Day They Robbed the Bank of England and was bowled over by his screen test, proclaiming "This is Lawrence!" Spiegel disliked O'Toole, having worked with him on Suddenly, Last Summer (where O'Toole was an understudy for Montgomery Clift and considered to take over his part after Clift's alcoholism caused problems), but acceded to Lean's demands after Finney and Brando dropped out. Pictures of Lawrence suggest also that O'Toole carried some resemblance to him, in spite of their considerable height difference. O'Toole's looks prompted a different reaction from Nol Coward, who after seeing the premire of the film quipped "If you had been any prettier, the film would have been called Florence of Arabia".[2]Alec Guinness as Prince Faisal. Faisal was originally to be portrayed by Laurence Olivier; Guinness, who performed in other David Lean films, got the part when Olivier dropped out. Guinness was made up to look as much like the real Faisal as possible; he recorded in his diaries that, while shooting in Jordan, he met several people who had known Faisal who actually mistook him for the late prince. Guinness said in interviews that he developed his Arab accent from a conversation he had with Omar Sharif.Anthony Quinn as Auda abu Tayi. Quinn got very much into his role; he spent hours applying his own makeup, using a photograph of the real Auda to make himself look as much like him as he could. One anecdote has Quinn arriving on-set for the first time in full costume, whereupon Lean, mistaking him for a native, asked his assistant to ring Quinn and notify him that they were replacing him with the new arrival.Jack Hawkins as General Allenby. Sam Spiegel pushed Lean to cast Cary Grant or Laurence Olivier (who was engaged at the Chichester Festival Theatre, and declined). Lean, however, convinced him to choose Hawkins due to his work for them on The Bridge on the River Kwai. Hawkins shaved his head for the role and reportedly clashed with David Lean several times during filming. Alec Guinness recounted that Hawkins was reprimanded by Lean for celebrating the end of a day's filming with an impromptu dance. Hawkins became close friends with O'Toole during filming, and the two often improvised dialogue during takes, much to Lean's dismay.Omar Sharif as Sherif Ali ibn el Kharish. The role was offered to many actors before Omar Sharif was cast. Horst Buchholz was the first choice, but had already signed on for the film One, Two, Three. Alain Delon had a successful screen test, but ultimately declined due to the brown contact lenses he would have had to wear. Maurice Ronet and Dilip Kumar were also considered.[3] Sharif, who was already a major star in the Middle East, was originally cast as Lawrence's guide Tafas, but when the above actors proved unsuitable, Sharif was shifted to the part of Ali.Jos Ferrer as the Turkish Bey. Ferrer was initially unsatisfied with the small size of his part, and accepted the role only on the condition of being paid $25,000 (more than O'Toole and Sharif combined) plus a factory-made Porsche.[4] However, he afterwards considered this his best film performance, saying in an interview: "If I was to be judged by any one film performance, it would be my five minutes in Lawrence." Peter O'Toole once said that he learned more about screen acting from Ferrer than he could in any acting class.Anthony Quayle as Colonel Harry Brighton. Quayle, a veteran of military roles, was cast after Jack Hawkins, the original choice, was shifted to the part of Allenby. Quayle and Lean argued over how to portray the character, with Lean feeling Brighton to be an honourable character, while Quayle thought him an idiot.Claude Rains as Mr. Dryden. Rains had previously worked with Lean on The Passionate Friends. Lean considered Rains one of his favourite actors and was happy to work with him again.Arthur Kennedy as Jackson Bentley. In the early days of the production, when the Bentley character had a more prominent role in the film, Kirk Douglas was considered for the part; Douglas expressed interest but demanded a star salary and the highest billing after O'Toole, thus being turned down by Spiegel. Later, Edmond O'Brien was cast in the part.[5] O'Brien filmed the Jerusalem scene, and (according to Omar Sharif) Bentley's political discussion with Ali, but he became ill due to a heart attack on location and had to be replaced at the last moment by Kennedy, who was recommended to Lean by Anthony Quinn.[6]Donald Wolfit as General Murray. Wolfit was one of O'Toole's mentors.Michel Ray as Farraj. At the time, Ray was an up-and-coming Anglo-Brazilian actor, who had previously appeared in several films, including Irving Rapper's The Brave One and Anthony Mann's The Tin Star. This however would be one of his last roles. Ray, under the name Michel de Carvalho, later became a prominent British businessman and, through his wife, Charlene de Carvalho-Heineken, is the majority shareholder in the Heineken brewing company, worth over 8,000,000,000 sterling as of 2002.I.S. Johar as Gasim. Johar was a well-known Bollywood actor who occasionally appeared in international productions.Zia Mohyeddin as Tafas. Mohyeddin was one of Pakistan's best-known actors, and launched a successful stage career in London after this film's success. Most famously, he played Dr Aziz in the stage and TV adaptation of A Passage to India in the late 1960s.Gamil Ratib as Majid. Ratib was a veteran Egyptian actor. His English was not considered good enough, so he was dubbed by Robert Rietti in the final film.John Dimech as Daud. Dimech was a waiter from Malta. His only prior film appearance was in 1959's Killers of Kilimanjaro.Hugh Miller as the RAMC colonel. Miller worked on several of Lean's films as a dialogue coach, and was one of several members of the film crew to be given bit parts (see below).Fernando Sancho as the Turkish sergeant. A well-known Spanish actor, best remembered for his roles in many spaghetti Westerns.Stuart Saunders as the regimental sergeant majorJack Gwillim as the club secretary. A well-known English actor often playing supporting roles in British war films, Gwillim was recommended to Lean for the film by close friend Anthony Quayle.Kenneth Fortescue as Allenby's aideHarry Fowler as Corporal PotterHoward Marion-Crawford as the medical officer. Marion-Crawford was cast at the last possible minute, during the filming of the "Damascus" scenes in Seville.John Ruddock as Elder Harith. Ruddock was a noted Shakespearean actor.Norman Rossington as Corporal JenkinsJack Hedley as a reporterHenry Oscar as Silliam, Faisal's servant. Oscar frequently played ethnic parts, including the Sudanese doctor in The Four Feathers (1939).Peter Burton as a Damascus SheikT. E. LawrencePrince FaisalAuda ibu TayiGeneral AllenbyGeneral MurrayFarraj and Daud, Lawrence's servantsGasim, the man Lawrence rescues from the desertTalal, the man who charges the Turkish column at TafasSherif Ali  A combination of numerous Arab leaders, particularly Sharif NassirFaisal's cousinwho led the Harith forces involved in the attack on Aqaba. The character was created largely because Lawrence did not serve with any one Arab leader (aside from Auda) throughout the majority of the war; most such leaders were amalgamated in Ali's character. This character was, however, almost certainly named after Sharif Ali ibn Hussein, a leader in the Harith tribe, who played a part in the Revolt and is mentioned and pictured in T.E. Lawrence's memoir Seven Pillars of Wisdom.Mr Dryden  The cynical Arab Bureau official was based loosely on numerous figures, including Sir Ronald Storrs, who was head of the Arab Bureau and later the governor of Palestine. It was largely Storrs' doing that Lawrence first met Faisal and became involved with the Revolt. This character is also partially based upon Lawrence's archaeologist friend, D.G. Hogarth, as well as Mark Sykes and Henry McMahon, who historically fulfilled Dryden's role as a political liaison. He was created by the screenwriters to "represent the civilian and political wing of British interests, to balance Allenby's military objectives."Colonel Brighton  In essence a composite of all of the British officers who served in the Middle East with Lawrence, most notably Lt. Col. Stewart F. Newcombe. Newcombe played much the same role as Brighton does in the film, being Lawrence's predecessor as liaison to the Arab Revolt; he and many of his men were captured by the Turks in 1916, though he later escaped. Also, like Brighton, Newcombe was not well liked by the Arabs, though he remained friends with Lawrence. (In Michael Wilson's original script, he was Colonel Newcombe; the character's name was later changed by Robert Bolt.) Brighton was apparently created to represent how ordinary British soldiers would feel about a man like Lawrence: impressed by his accomplishments but repulsed by his affected manner. (Lean argued that Brighton was "the only honourable character" in the film, whereas Anthony Quayle referred to his character as an "idiot".)Turkish Bey  The Turkish Bey who captures Lawrence in Deraa wasaccording to Lawrence himselfGeneral Hajim Bey (in Turkish, Hacim Muhiddin Bey), though he is not named in the film. Though the incident was mentioned in Lawrence's autobiography Seven Pillars of Wisdom. Some biographers (Jeremy Wilson, John Mack) argue that Lawrence's account is to be believed; others (Michael Asher, Lawrence James) argue that contemporary evidence suggests that Lawrence never went to Dera'a at this time and that the story is invented.Jackson Bentley  Based on famed American journalist Lowell Thomas, who helped make Lawrence famous with accounts of his bravery. However, Thomas was at the time a young man who spent only a few days (or weeks at most) with Lawrence in the field  unlike Bentley, who is depicted as a cynical middle-aged Chicago newspaperman who is present during the whole of Lawrence's later campaigns. Bentley was the narrator in Michael Wilson's original script, but Robert Bolt reduced his role significantly for the final script. Thomas did not start reporting on Lawrence until after the end of World War I, and held Lawrence in high regard, unlike Bentley, who seems to hold him in contempt.Tafas  Lawrence's guide to Faisal is based on his actual guide, Sheikh Obeid el-Rashid, of the Hazimi branch of the Beni Salem, whom Lawrence referred to as Tafas several times in Seven Pillars. Tafas and Lawrence did meet Sherif Ali at a well during Lawrence's travels to Faisal, but the encounter was not fatal for either party. (Indeed, this scene would create much controversy amongst Arab viewers.)Medical officer  This unnamed officer who confronts Lawrence in Damascus is based on an actual incident in Seven Pillars of Wisdom. Lawrence's meeting the officer again while in British uniform was, however, an invention of Wilson or Bolt.Outstanding Directorial Achievement  David LeanBest Foreign Film  Sam SpiegelBest Cinematography Award  Freddie YoungBest Director Foreign Film  David LeanBest Foreign Language Film  David LeanBest Director  David LeanBest British Dramatic Screenplay  Robert Bolt, Michael Wilson1998 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies #52001 AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills #232003 AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

T.E. Lawrence, hero #10

T.E. Lawrence, hero #102005 AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores #32006 AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers #302007 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #72008 AFI's 10 Top 10  #1 Epic filmT.E. Lawrence, hero #10Cinema of JordanFilms considered the greatest everBFI Top 100 British filmsBrownlow, Kevin (1996). David Lean: A Biography. Richard Cohen Books. ISBN978-1-86066-042-9.Turner, Adrian (1994). The Making of David Lean's Lawrence of Arabia. Dragon's World Ltd. ISBN978-1-85028-211-2.Morris, L. Robert and Raskin, Lawrence (1992). Lawrence of Arabia: the 30th Anniversary Pictorial History. Doubleday & Anchor, New York. A book on the creation of the film, authorised by Sir David Lean.Lawrence of Arabia at the Internet Movie DatabaseLawrence of Arabia at AllRoviLawrence of Arabia at Box Office MojoLawrence of Arabia at MetacriticLawrence of Arabia at Rotten TomatoesLawrence of Arabia "Making of" trailer at YouTubeLawrence of Arabia Theatrical trailer at YouTubeEssay on the Lawrence of Arabia film in the "Lowell Thomas and Lawrence of Arabia" online exhibit at Clio Visualizing HistoryThe Wizard of Oz is a 1939 American fantasy adventure film produced by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Based on the 1900 novel The Wonderful Wizard of Oz by L. Frank Baum,[1] the film stars Judy Garland, Ray Bolger, Jack Haley, Bert Lahr, and Frank Morgan, with Billie Burke, Margaret Hamilton, Charley Grapewin, Clara Blandick and the Singer Midgets as the Munchkins.[2] Notable for its use of special effects, Technicolor, fantasy storytelling and unusual characters, it has become, over the years, one of the best known of all films and part of American popular culture.The film is mostly in Technicolor, but its opening and closing sequences are in sepia-tinted black-and-white, including all of the film's credits. It was directed primarily by Victor Fleming. Noel Langley, Florence Ryerson and Edgar Allan Woolf received credit for the screenplay, but there were uncredited contributions by others. The lyrics for the songs were written by E.Y. Harburg, the music by Harold Arlen. Incidental music, based largely on the songs, was by Herbert Stothart, with borrowings from classical composers.Although the film received largely positive reviews, it was not a huge box office success on its initial release, earning only $3,017,000 on a $2,000,000 budget. [3] The film was MGM's most expensive production up to that time, but its initial release failed to recoup the studio's investment. Subsequent re-releases made up for that, however.[4] It was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture. It lost that award to Gone with the Wind, but won two others, including Best Original Song for "Over the Rainbow". The song was ranked first in the AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs list.Telecasts of the film began in 1956, re-introducing the film to the public and eventually becoming an annual tradition, making it one of the most famous films ever made.[1] The film was named the most-watched motion picture in history by the Library of Congress,[5] is often ranked among the Top 10 Best Movies of All Time in various critics' and popular polls, and is the source of many memorable quotes referenced in modern popular culture.Kansas farm girl Dorothy Gale (Judy Garland) lives with her Aunt Em (Clara Blandick), Uncle Henry (Charley Grapewin), and three farm hands, Hickory (Jack Haley), Hunk (Ray Bolger), and Zeke (Bert Lahr); however, no one pays any real attention to her. When Miss Almira Gulch (Margaret Hamilton) is bitten by Dorothy's pet Cairn Terrier, Toto, she gets a sheriff's order and takes him away to be destroyed. He escapes and returns to Dorothy, who, fearing for his life, runs away with him. Dorothy soon encounters a traveling fortune teller named Professor Marvel (Frank Morgan), who guesses she has run away and tells her fortune. He convinces her to return home by falsely telling her that Aunt Em has fallen ill from grief. With a tornado fast approaching, she rushes back to the farmhouse, but is unable to join her family in the locked storm cellar. Taking shelter inside the house, she is knocked unconscious by a window frame blown in by the twister.Dorothy awakens to find the house being carried away by the tornado. After it falls back to earth, she opens the door and finds herself alone in a strange, beautiful village. Arriving in a floating bubble, Glinda, the Good Witch of the North (Billie Burke) not the South as in the Oz books, informs her that her house landed on and killed the Wicked Witch of the East. The timid Munchkins come out of hiding to celebrate the Witch's demise by singing "Ding-Dong! The Witch Is Dead". Their celebration is interrupted when the Wicked Witch of the West (Margaret Hamilton) suddenly appears in a cloud of red smoke and tries to claim her dead sister's powerful ruby slippers. But Glinda magically transfers them onto Dorothy's feet and reminds the Witch of the West that her power is ineffectual in Munchkinland. She promises Dorothy "I'll get you, my pretty... and your little dog, too!" before vanishing. When Dorothy asks how to get back home, Glinda advises her to seek the help of the mysterious Wizard of Oz in the Emerald City, which she can reach by following the Yellow Brick Road, and warns her never to remove the ruby slippers.On her way to the city, Dorothy meets a Scarecrow (Ray Bolger), a Tin Man (Jack Haley), and a Cowardly Lion (Bert Lahr), who lament that they lack respectively a brain, a heart, and courage. The three decide to accompany her in hopes that the Wizard will also fulfill their desires, although they demonstrate that they already have the qualities they believe they lack: the Scarecrow has several good ideas, the Tin Man is kind and sympathetic, and the Lion, though terrified, is ready to face danger. After Dorothy and the Cowardly Lion nearly succumb to one of the Witch's traps, the quartet enters the Emerald City and see the Wizard, who appears as a disembodied, intimidating head. In a booming voice, he states that he will grant their wishes if they bring him the Wicked Witch's broomstick.The group set out for the Witch's castle, but she detects them and dispatches her army of flying monkeys, who carry Dorothy and Toto back to her. When the Witch threatens to drown Toto, Dorothy agrees to give up the slippers, but a shower of sparks prevents their removal. While the Witch ponders over this, Toto escapes and leads Dorothy's companions to the castle. After overpowering some Winkie guards and disguising themselves in their uniforms, they free her. The Witch and the Winkies corner the group on a parapet, where she sets the Scarecrow's arm ablaze. Dorothy throws water on her friend and accidentally splashes the Witch, causing her to melt. The Winkies are delighted to now be free, and their captain gives Dorothy the broomstick.Upon their return to the Wizard's chamber, Toto opens a curtain, revealing the Wizard to be nothing more than an ordinary man (Frank Morgan). Apologetic, he explains that Dorothy's companions already possess what they have been seeking all along, but bestows upon them tokens of esteem in recognition of them. Also born in Kansas, he was brought to Oz by a runaway hot air balloon. He offers to take Dorothy home in the same balloon, leaving the Scarecrow, Tin Man, and Lion in charge of the Emerald City. As they are about to leave, Toto jumps out and Dorothy runs after him. The Wizard, unable to control the balloon, leaves without her. Glinda appears and tells her that she always had the power to return home. Following her instructions, Dorothy closes her eyes, taps her heels together three times, and repeats "There's no place like home". She awakens in her bedroom somewhat dazed, surrounded by family and friends who were worried sick about the girl. Despite nobody believing her, she tells them of her adventures.Only two of the Singer Midgets' actual voices are heard in the film (when Dorothy gets in the horse-drawn carriage and the two Munchkins present her with a bouquet); the rest of their vocalizations were dubbed by professional singers and voice actors, including Pinto Colvig, Abe Dinovitch and Billy Bletcher, and singing groups The King's Men, The Debutantes and Ken Darby Singers. [6] Although the Wicked Witch's guards spoke their own dialogue, their singing was also dubbed by others and was slowed down.[citation needed] Adriana Caselotti voiced Juliet, and Abe Dinovitch and Candy Candido voiced the Apple Trees.[7]Pat Walshe was the last surviving significant member of the cast when he died in December 1991, aged 91.[8] Meinhardt Raabe was one of the last surviving Munchkin actors, and the last surviving cast member with any dialogue when he died in April 2010, aged 94. [9]Jerry Maren (born January 24, 1920), who played the middle Munchkin of the Lollipop Guild (in green costume) who hands the lollipop to Dorothy, is an American actor and one of only three confirmed surviving dwarf Munchkins from the film. The other two surviving Munchkin cast members are Margaret Williams Pellegrini and Ruth Robinson Duccini, making Maren the last surviving male Munchkin from the film. He recently has made appearances on the reality show Hollywood Treasure, on the SyFy Channel.Development of the film started when the success of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs showed that films adapted from popular children's stories and fairytale folklore could be successful.[10][1] In January 1938, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer bought the rights to the hugely popular novel from Samuel Goldwyn, who had toyed with the idea of making the film as a vehicle for Eddie Cantor, who was under contract to the Goldwyn studios and whom Goldwyn wanted to cast as the Scarecrow.[10]The script went through a number of writers and revisions before the final shooting.[11] Originally, Mervyn LeRoy's assistant William H. Cannon submitted a brief four-page outline.[11] Because recent fantasy films had not fared well at the box office, he recommended that the magical elements of the story be toned down or eliminated. In his outline, the Scarecrow was a man so stupid that the only way he could get employment was to dress up as a scarecrow and scare away crows in a cornfield, and the Tin Woodman was a hardened criminal so heartless he was sentenced to be placed in a tin suit for eternity. The torture of being encased in the suit had softened him and made him gentle and kind.[11] His vision was similar to Larry Semon's 1925 film adaptation of the story, in which the magical element is absent.After that, LeRoy hired screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz to work on a script. Despite Mankiewicz's notorious reputation at that time for being an alcoholic, he soon delivered a 17-page draft of the Kansas scenes, and a few weeks later, he handed in a further 56 pages. Noel Langley and poet Ogden Nash were also hired to write separate versions of the story. None of the three writers involved knew anyone else was working on a script, but it was not an uncommon procedure. Nash soon delivered a four page outline, Langley turned in a 43-page treatment and a full film script. He turned in three more, this time incorporating the songs that had been written by Harold Arlen and Yip Harburg. No sooner had he completed it than Florence Ryerson and Edgar Allan Woolf submitted a script and were brought on board to touch up the writing. They would be responsible for making sure the story stayed true to the Baum book. During filming, Victor Fleming and John Lee Mahin revised the script further, adding and cutting some scenes. In addition, Jack Haley and Bert Lahr are known to have written some of their own dialogue for the Kansas sequence.The final draft of the script was completed on October 8, 1938, following numerous rewrites.[12] All in all, it was a mish-mash of many creative minds, but Langley, Ryerson and Woolf got the film credits. Along with the contributors already mentioned, others who assisted with the adaptation without receiving official credit include: Irving Brecher, Herbert Fields, Arthur Freed, E. Y. Harburg, Samuel Hoffenstein, Jack Mintz, Sid Silvers, Richard Thorpe, George Cukor and King Vidor.[10]In addition, songwriter Harburg's son (and biographer) Ernie Harburg reports,[13]The original producers thought that a 1939 audience was too sophisticated to accept Oz as a straight-ahead fantasy; therefore, it was reconceived as a lengthy, elaborate dream. Because of a perceived need to attract a youthful audience through appealing to modern fads and styles, the script originally featured a scene with a series of musical contests. A spoiled, selfish princess in Oz had outlawed all forms of music except classical and operetta and went up against Dorothy in a singing contest in which her swing style enchanted listeners and won the grand prize. This part was initially written for Betty Jaynes.[14] The plan was later dropped.Another scene, which was removed before final script approval and never filmed, was a concluding scene back in Kansas after Dorothy's return. Hunk (the Kansan counterpart to the Scarecrow) is leaving for agricultural college and extracts a promise from Dorothy to write to him. The implication of the scene is that romance will eventually develop between the two, which also may have been intended as an explanation for Dorothy's partiality for the Scarecrow over her other two companions. This plot idea was never totally dropped, however; it is especially noticeable in the final script when Dorothy, just before she is to leave Oz, tells the Scarecrow, "I think I'll miss you most of all."[15]In his book The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, Baum describes Kansas as being 'in shades of gray'. Further, Dorothy lived inside a farmhouse which had its paint blistered and washed away by the weather, giving it an 'air of grayness'. The house and property were situated in the middle of a sweeping prairie where the grass was burnt gray by harsh sun. Aunt Em and Uncle Henry were 'gray with age'. Effectively, the use of monochrome sepia tones for the Kansas sequences was a stylistic choice that evoked the dull and gray countryside.[citation needed] Much attention was given to the use of color in the production, with the MGM production crew favoring some hues over others. Consequently, it took the studio's art department almost a week to settle on the final shade of yellow used for the Yellow Brick Road.[16]Mervyn LeRoy had always insisted that he wanted to cast Judy Garland to play Dorothy from the start; however, evidence suggests that negotiations took place early in pre-production for Shirley Temple to play the part of Dorothy, on loan out from 20th Century Fox. A persistent rumor also existed that Fox was in turn promised Clark Gable and Jean Harlow as a loan from MGM. The tale is almost certainly untrue, as Harlow died in 1937, before MGM had even purchased the rights to the story. Despite this, the story appears in many film biographies (including Temple's own autobiography). The documentary The Wonderful Wizard of Oz: The Making of a Movie Classic states that Mervyn LeRoy was under pressure to cast Temple, then the most popular child star; but at an unofficial audition, MGM musical mainstay Roger Edens listened to her sing and felt that an actress with a different style was needed. Newsreel footage is included in which Temple wisecracks, "There's no place like home," suggesting that she was being considered for the part at that time.[17] A possibility is that this consideration did indeed take place, but that Gable and Harlow were not part of the proposed deal.Actress Deanna Durbin, who was under contract to Universal, was also considered for the part of Dorothy. Durbin, at the time, far exceeded Garland in film experience and fan base and the two had co-starred in a 1936 two-reeler called Every Sunday. The film was most notable for exhibiting Durbin's operatic style of singing against Garland's jazzier style. Durbin was possibly passed over once it was decided to bring on Betty Jaynes, also an operatic singer, to rival Garland's jazz in the aforementioned discarded subplot of the film.Casting The Wizard of Oz was problematic, with two actors swapping roles prior to the start of filming. Ray Bolger was originally cast as the Tin Man and Buddy Ebsen (later famous for his role as Jed Clampett on the popular 1960s TV show The Beverly Hillbillies) was to play the Scarecrow.[12] Bolger, however, longed to play the Scarecrow, as his childhood idol Fred Stone had done on stage in 1902; with that very performance, Stone had inspired him to become a vaudevillian in the first place. Now unhappy with his role as the Tin Man (reportedly claiming, "I'm not a tin performer; I'm fluid"), Bolger convinced producer Mervyn LeRoy to recast him in the part he so desired.[18] Ebsen did not object; after going over the basics of the Scarecrow's distinctive gait with Bolger (as a professional dancer, Ebsen had been cast because the studio was confident he would be up to the task of replicating the famous "wobbly-walk" of Stone's Scarecrow), he recorded all of his songs, went through all the rehearsals as the Tin Man, and began filming with the rest of the cast.[19]Bert Lahr was signed for the Cowardly Lion on July 25, 1938; the next month, Charles Grapewin was cast as Uncle Henry on August 12.W. C. Fields was originally chosen for the role of the Wizard, but the studio ran out of patience after protracted haggling over his fee; instead, another contract player, Frank Morgan, was cast on September 22.Gale Sondergaard was originally cast as the Wicked Witch. She became unhappy when the witch's persona shifted from sly and glamorous (thought to emulate the wicked queen in Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs) into the familiar "ugly hag." She turned down the role and was replaced on October 10, 1938, just three days before filming started, by MGM contract player Margaret Hamilton. Sondergaard said in an interview for a bonus feature on the DVD that she had no regrets about turning down the part, and would go on to play a glamorous villain in Fox's version of Maurice Maeterlinck's The Blue Bird in 1940; that same year, Margaret Hamilton would play a role remarkably similar to the Wicked Witch in the Judy Garland film Babes in Arms.According to Aljean Harmetz, when the wardrobe department was looking for a coat for Frank Morgan, they decided that they wanted a once elegant coat that had "gone to seed". They went to a second-hand shop and purchased a whole rack of coats, from which Morgan, the head of the wardrobe department and director Fleming chose one they thought had the perfect appearance of shabby gentility. One day, while he was on set wearing the coat, Morgan turned out one of the pockets and discovered a label indicating that the coat had once belonged to Oz author L. Frank Baum. Mary Mayer, a unit publicist for the film, contacted the tailor and Baum's widow, who both verified that the coat had indeed once belonged to the writer. After filming was completed, the coat was presented to Mrs. Baum. Baum biographer Michael Patrick Hearn disbelieves the story, it having been refuted by members of the Baum family, who never saw the coat or knew of the story, as well as by Margaret Hamilton, who considered it a concocted studio rumor.[20]Filming commenced October 13, 1938 on the MGM Studios lot in Culver City, California, under the direction of Richard Thorpe (replacing original director Norman Taurog, who only filmed a few early Technicolor tests and was then reassigned). Thorpe initially shot about two weeks of footage (nine days, total) involving Dorothy's first encounter with the Scarecrow, as well as a number of sequences in the Wicked Witch's castle, such as Dorothy's rescue (which, though unreleased, comprises the only footage of Buddy Ebsen's Tin Man).Ten days into the shoot, however, Ebsen suffered a reaction to the aluminum powder makeup he wore; the powder he breathed in daily as it was applied had coated his lungs. Ebsen was hospitalized in critical condition, and subsequently was forced to leave the project; in a later interview (included on the 2005 DVD release of Wizard of Oz), Ebsen recalled the studio heads initially disbelieving that he was seriously ill, only realizing the extent of the actor's condition when they showed up in the hospital as he was convalescing in an iron lung. Ebsen's sudden medical departure caused the film to shut down while a new actor was found to fill the part. No full footage of Ebsen as the Tin Man has ever been released only photographs taken during filming and test photos of different makeup styles remain. MGM did not publicize the reasons for Ebsen's departure until decades later, in a promotional documentary about the film. His replacement, Jack Haley, simply assumed he had been fired.[21]Producer Mervyn LeRoy had taken this time to review the already shot footage and felt that Thorpe seemed to be rushing the picture along, creating a negative impact on the actors' performances; thus, LeRoy decided to have Thorpe replaced. Despite being let go from the production, however, some of Thorpe's footage would be retained in the final edit, such as close-ups of the Scarecrow sans Dorothy during his first scene (due to a major subsequent change in the Dorothy character makeup, wide shots and close-ups of Judy Garland from the days of that shoot could not be used), as well as certain sequences too expensive to reorganize and reshoot, including the entirety of the Winkies' march outside the Witch's castle during the climax of the film right up to when the Scarecrow, Lion, and Buddy Ebsen's Tin Man (though his face is not seen) sneak into the castle behind the marchers. [1]During reorganization on the production, George Cukor temporarily took over, under LeRoy's guidance. Initially, the studio had made Garland wear a blond wig and heavy, "baby-doll" makeup, and she played Dorothy in an exaggerated fashion; now, Cukor changed Judy Garland's and Margaret Hamilton's makeup and costumes, and told Garland to "be herself." This meant that all the scenes Garland and Hamilton had already completed had to be discarded and re-filmed. Cukor also suggested that the studio cast Jack Haley, on loan from 20th Century Fox, as the Tin Man. To keep down on production costs, Haley only rerecorded "If I Only Had a Heart" and solo lines during "The Jitterbug" and "If I Only Had the Nerve"; as such, Buddy Ebsen's voice can still be heard in the remaining songs featuring the Tin Man in group vocals. The makeup used for Haley was quietly changed to an aluminum paste, with a layer of clown white greasepaint underneath to protect his skin; although it did not have the same dire effect on Haley, he did at one point suffer from an unpleasant eye infection from it.In addition, Ray Bolger's original recording of "If I Only Had a Brain" had been far more sedate compared to the version heard in the film; during this time, Cukor and LeRoy decided that a more energetic rendition would better suit Dorothy's initial meeting with the Scarecrow (initially, it was to contrast with his lively manner in Thorpe's footage), and was re-recorded as such. At first thought to be lost for over seven decades, a recording of this original version was rediscovered in 2009.[22]Cukor did not actually shoot any scenes for the film, merely acting as something of a "creative advisor" to the troubled production, and, because of his prior commitment to direct Gone with the Wind, he left on November 3, 1938, at which time Victor Fleming assumed the directorial responsibility. As director, Fleming chose not to shift the film from Cukor's creative realignment, as producer LeRoy had already pronounced his satisfaction with the new course the film was taking.Production on the bulk of the Technicolor sequences was a long and cumbersome process that ran for over six months, from October 1938 to March 1939. Most of the actors worked six days a week and had to arrive at the studio as early as four or five in the morning, to be fitted with makeup and costumes and would not leave until seven or eight at night. Cumbersome makeup and costumes were compounded by the fact that the early Technicolor process required a significant amount of lighting to be used (due to the low ASA speed of the film), which would usually heat the set to over a hundred degrees. According to Ray Bolger, most of the Oz principals were banned from eating in the studio's commissary due to their costumes. Margaret Hamilton's makeup meant that food could not be ingested and so she practically lived on a liquid diet during filming of the Oz sequences. Additionally, it took upwards of 12 takes to have Dorothy's dog Toto run alongside the actors as they skipped down the Yellow Brick Road.All of the Oz sequences were filmed in three-strip Technicolor.[10][11] The opening and closing credits, as well as the Kansas sequences, were filmed in black and white and colored in a sepia tone process.[10] Sepia-toned film was also used in the scene where Aunt Em appears in the Wicked Witch's crystal ball.The massive shoot also proved to be somewhat chaotic. This was most evident when trying to put together the Munchkinland sequences. MGM talent scouts searched the country far and wide to come up with over a hundred little people who would make up the citizens of Munchkinland; this meant that most of the film's Oz sequences would have to already be shot before work on the Munchkinland sequence could begin. According to Munchkin actor Jerry Maren, each little person was paid over $125 a week for their performances. Munchkin Meinhardt Raabe, who played the coroner, revealed in the 1990 documentary The Making of the Wizard of Oz that the MGM costume and wardrobe department, under the direction of designer Adrian, had to design over one hundred costumes for the Munchkin sequences. They then had to photograph and catalog each Munchkin in his or her costume so that they could correctly apply the same costume and makeup each day of production.Filming even proved to be dangerous, at times. Margaret Hamilton was severely burned in the Munchkinland scene, and as she tells the story on the DVD commentary: `There was a little elevator that was supposed to take me down, with a bit of fire and smoke erupting to dramatize and conceal my exit. The first take ran like clockwork, I went down out of my clothes, the fire and smoke erupted and that's the one you see.' But for the second take, the timing was off, and she was exposed to the flames. The grease in her copper-based makeup caught fire and had to be completely and quickly removed before the ensuing second-degree burns on her hands and face could be treated. After spending some six weeks in the hospital convalescing, she returned to the picture.On February 12, 1939, Victor Fleming hastily replaced George Cukor in directing Gone with the Wind; the next day, King Vidor was assigned as director by the studio to finish the filming of The Wizard of Oz (mainly the sepia Kansas sequences, including Judy Garland's singing of "Over the Rainbow"). In later years, when the film became firmly established as a classic, Vidor chose not to take public credit for his contribution until after the death of his friend Fleming in 1949.Principal photography concluded with the Kansas sequences on March 16, 1939; nonetheless re-shoots and pick-up shots were filmed throughout April, May and into June, under the direction of producer LeRoy. After the deletion of the "Over the Rainbow" reprise during subsequent test screenings in early June, Judy Garland had to be brought back one more time in order to reshoot the "Auntie Em, I'm frightened!" scene without the song; the footage of Clara Blandick's Auntie Em, as shot by Vidor, had already been set aside for rear projection work, and was simply reused. After Margaret Hamilton's torturous experience with the Munchkinland elevator, she refused to do the pick-ups for the scene in which she flies on a broomstick which billows smoke, so LeRoy chose to have stand-in Betty Danko perform the scene instead; as a result, Danko was severely injured doing the scene due to a malfunction in the smoke mechanism.[23]At this point, the film began a long arduous post-production. Herbert Stothart had to compose the film's background score, while A. Arnold Gillespie had to perfect the various special effects that the film required, including many of the rear projection shots. The MGM art department also had to create the various matte paintings for the background of many of the scenes.One significant innovation for the film was the use of "stencil printing" which was used for the transition to Technicolor: Each frame was to be hand-tinted to maintain the sepia tone; however, because this was too expensive and labor intensive, it was abandoned and MGM used a simpler and less expensive variation of the process. During the re-shoots in May, the inside of the farm house was painted sepia, and when Dorothy opens the door, it is not Garland but her stand-in, Bobbie Koshay, wearing a sepia gingham dress, who then backs out of frame; once the camera moves through the door, Garland steps back into frame in her bright blue gingham dress (as noted in DVD extras), and the sepia-painted door briefly tints her with the same color before she emerges from the house's shadow, into the bright glare of the Technicolor lighting. This also meant that the re-shoots provided the first proper shot of Munchkinland; if one looks carefully, the brief cut to Dorothy looking around outside the house bisects a single long shot, from the inside of the doorway to the pan-around that finally ends in a reverse-angle as the ruins of the house are seen behind Dorothy as she comes to a stop at the foot of the small bridge.Test screenings of the film began on June 5, 1939.[24] Oz initially was running nearly two hours long. LeRoy and Fleming knew that at least a quarter of an hour needed to be deleted to get the film down to a manageable running time, the average film in 1939 running just about 90 minutes. Three sneak previews in Santa Barbara, Pomona and San Luis Obispo, California helped guide LeRoy and Fleming in the cutting. Among the many cuts was "The Jitterbug" number, the Scarecrow's elaborate dance sequence following "If I Only Had A Brain", a reprise of "Over the Rainbow" and "Ding Dong the Witch Is Dead", and a number of smaller dialogue sequences. This left the final, mostly serious portion of the film with no songs, only the dramatic underscoring.One song that was almost deleted was "Over the Rainbow". MGM had felt that it made the Kansas sequence too long, as well as being far over the heads of the target audience of children. The studio also thought that it was degrading for Judy Garland to sing in a barnyard. Producer Mervyn LeRoy, uncredited associate producer Arthur Freed, and director Victor Fleming fought to keep it and eventually won. The song went on to win the Academy Award for Best Song of the Year. In 2004, the song was ranked #1 by the American Film Institute on AFI's 100 Years100 Songs list.After the preview in San Luis Obispo in early July, The Wizard of Oz was officially released in August 1939 at its current 101-minute running time.The film was previewed in three test markets: on August 11, 1939, at Kenosha, Wisconsin and Cape Cod, Massachusetts,[25][26] and at the Strand Theatre in Oconomowoc, Wisconsin on August 12.[27]The Hollywood premiere was on August 15, 1939,[26] at Grauman's Chinese Theatre.[28] The New York City premiere at Loew's Capitol Theatre on August 17, 1939 was followed by a live performance with Judy Garland and her frequent film co-star Mickey Rooney. They would continue to perform there after each screening for a week, extended in Rooney's case for a second week and in Garland's to three (with Oz co-stars Ray Bolger and Bert Lahr replacing Rooney for the third and final week). The movie opened nationally on August 25, 1939.The film grossed approximately $3 million (approximately $50 million today) against production/distribution costs of $2.8 million (approximately $47 million today) in its initial release. It did not show what MGM considered a large profit until a 1949 re-release earned an additional $1.5 million (approximately $15 million today).Frank S. Nugent considered the film a "delightful piece of wonder-working which had the youngsters' eyes shining and brought a quietly amused gleam to the wiser ones of the oldsters"; "not since Disney's Snow White has anything quite so fantastic succeeded half so well.[29] Nugent had issues with some of the film's special effects, writing that "with the best of will and ingenuity, they cannot make a Munchkin or a Flying Monkey that will not still suggest, however vaguely, a Singer's Midget in a Jack Dawn masquerade. Nor can they, without a few betraying jolts and split-screen overlappings, bring down from the sky the great soap bubble in which the Good Witch rides and roll it smoothly into place." According to Nugent, "Judy Garland's Dorothy is a pert and fresh-faced miss with the wonder-lit eyes of a believer in fairy tales, but the Baum fantasy is at its best when the Scarecrow, the Woodman and the Lion are on the move."[29]Roger Ebert chose it as one of his Great Films, writing that "'The Wizard of Oz' has a wonderful surface of comedy and music, special effects and excitement, but we still watch it six decades later because its underlying story penetrates straight to the deepest insecurities of childhood, stirs them and then reassures them."[30]Writer Salman Rushdie acknowledged "The Wizard of Oz was my very first literary influence" in his 2002 musings about the film.[31] He has written that "When I first saw The Wizard of Oz it made a writer of me."[32] His first short story, written at the age of ten, was titled "Over the Rainbow".[32]All 75 of the Rotten Tomatoes critics rating the film gave it a positive review, giving it a 100%.[33]Many details within the plot are omitted or altered, while many of the perils that Dorothy encountered in the novel are not at all mentioned in the feature film. Oz, and Dorothy's time there, is real in the book, not just a dream. The Good Witch of the North (who has no name in the book), Glinda the Good Witch of the South, and the Queen of the Field Mice are merged into one omniscient character, Glinda the Good Witch of the North. To take advantage of the new vivid Technicolor process, Dorothy's silver shoes were changed to ruby slippers for the movie. Due to time constraints, a number of incidents from the book, including the Dainty China Country and the Hammerheads, were cut. The role of the Wicked Witch of the West was also enlarged for the movie (in the book, although she is mentioned several times before, she is only present for one chapter in the exact middle of the book). This was done to provide more dramatic tension throughout the film, and to unify what is otherwise a very episodic plot. The role and character of Dorothy were also transformed: in the film, she is depicted as a damsel in distress who needs to be rescued, while in the novel, she, a little girl, rescues her friends, in keeping with Baum's feminist sympathies.There are at least 44 identifiable major differences between the original book and this movie interpretation.[34][35] Nevertheless, the film was far more faithful to Baum's original book than many earlier scripts (see below) or film versions. Two silent versions were produced in 1910 and 1925 and the seven-minute animated cartoon in 1933 (the 1925 version, with which Baum, who had died six years earlier, had no association, made Dorothy a Queen of Oz, rather like the later sci-fi TV miniseries Tin Man). The 1939 movie interprets the Oz experience as a dream, in which many of the characters that Dorothy meets represent the people from her home life (such as Miss Gulch, Professor Marvel, and the farmhands, none of whom appear in the book). In L. Frank Baum's original novel, Oz is meant to be a real place, one that Dorothy would return to in his later Oz books and which would later provide a refuge for Aunt Em and Uncle Henry after being unable to pay the mortgage on the new house that was built after the old one really was carried away by the tornado. Also in the novel, the four travelers were required to wear magic spectacles before entering the Emerald City. [36]Beginning with the 1949 reissue, and continuing until the film's 50th anniversary VHS release in 1989, the opening Kansas sequences were shown in black and white instead of the sepia tone as originally filmed.[37]This was done despite the fact that the sepia had been specifically chosen for the picture to help mask the switch to Technicolor.[citation needed] The actual switch occurs before the door is opened from the transported house onto the Land of Oz. In the sepia prints, one doesn't notice any color until that door is opened, because the door itself is a shade of brown which matches the sepia. In black and white, one cannot help but notice the switch to color before the door is opened, which was precisely what the film's producers wanted to avoid. For the film's 50th anniversary restoration, the sepia was brought back to the opening and closing Kansas scenes and beginning in 1990, the film was shown on CBS television nationally as originally released in 1939. It was also very common (and even an FCC requirement for early color broadcasters) for TV stations to turn off the color portion of their transmission when broadcasting a black and white show or movie. This was because unusual colors or "color noise" could be seen during the showing of black-and-white programming under some conditions. Though the opening Kansas scenes in The Wizard of Oz were meant to be shown in sepia and though the sepia was restored to the film in 1989 for the film's 50th anniversary VHS and laserdisc reissue, a few local CBS affiliates still showed the sepia portion of the film with the color signal disabled for many years.[citation needed] Most of these were small market affiliates that ran some syndicated black-and-white shows as these stations were used to turning the color modes off during black-and-white programming. One CBS affiliate, WGNX in Atlanta(now WGCL-TV) transmitted the opening Kansas scenes in black and white as recently as its 1996 showing because this station was an independent station that ran a moderate number of black-and-white films before becoming a CBS affiliate.1955 saw the release of a widescreen 1.85:1 aspect ratio version to theatres, with portions of the top and the bottom of the film removed via soft mattes to produce a widescreen effect. The re-release trailer falsely claimed that "every scene" from Baum's novel was in the film, including "the rescue of Dorothy", though there is no such incident in the novel.The MGM "Children's Matinees" series re-released the film twice, in 1970 and 1971.[38]In 1986, the film was acquired by Turner Entertainment as part of a deal involving a majority of MGM's pre-1986 library. In 1996, Turner merged with Time Warner, and since then Warner Bros. Pictures has been handling distribution for all media on Turner's behalf.The film was re-released again in U.S. theaters by WB on November 6, 1998. The version was a newly restored and remastered print with a remixed stereo soundtrack. It also featured restoration and sound remixing credits at the end (none of these extra credits have appeared on any video release).In 1999, the film had a theatrical re-release in Australia, in honor of the film's 60th anniversary.In 2002, the film had a very limited re-release in the U.S. theaters.[39]On September 23, 2009, The Wizard of Oz was re-released in select theaters for a one-night-only event in honor of the film's 70th Anniversary and as a promotion for various new disc releases later in the month. An encore of this event was re-released in theaters on November 17, 2009.[40]On June 30, 2012, the film had a theatrical re-release in the U.S. at the Saban Theatre in Beverly Hills. It was hosted by the Los Angeles Conservancy using an original copy of the film from the 1939 release.In 2013, the film is going to re-release in DVD and Blu-Ray in 3D for 90th Celebration of Warner Bros.[41]The film was first shown on television November 3, 1956 by CBS, as the last installment of the Ford Star Jubilee, making it, historically, the first uncut Hollywood film shown in one evening on a commercial television network. The Oz scenes were shown in color (posters still exist advertising the broadcast and they specifically say in color and black-and-white), but because most television sets then were not color sets, few members of the TV audience saw the film that way. An estimated 45 million people watched the broadcast. However, it was not rerun until three years later. On December 13, 1959, the film was shown (again on CBS) as a two-hour Christmas season special at an earlier time, to an even larger audience (commercial breaks were much shorter then, enabling the film to run in a two-hour time slot without being cut). Encouraged by the response, CBS decided to make it an annual Christmas tradition, showing it from 1959 through 1962 always on the second Sunday of December. The film was not shown on December 8, 1963, the second Sunday in December of that year, as might have been expected. This was perhaps due to the proximity of the John F. Kennedy assassination,[dubious  discuss] which had occurred on November 22 of that year and plunged the U.S. into a period of mourning. Others say that there was no room on the schedule, because by then there were other Christmas specials on television, though not nearly as many as there would be in later years. A Charlie Brown Christmas, How the Grinch Stole Christmas! and Frosty the Snowman, all first shown on CBS in the 1960s, were still more than two years away, NBC did not premiere Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer until December 1964, and telecasts of The Nutcracker were quite infrequent then.Whatever the reason, the telecast was moved from December 1963 to the evening of January 26, 1964. The 1964 broadcast marked the end of the Christmas season showings, but The Wizard of Oz was nevertheless still televised only once a year for nearly three decades. Beginning in 1967, showing of the film was moved to February, and after that the date of the showings would constantly shift, rather than always occurring in the same month. That same year, the film was bought for annual TV showings by NBC, whose telecasts of it began in April 1968, but by 1976, it had reverted to CBS. CBS dropped its broadcasts of the film in 1998; the rights are now in the hands of Turner Entertainment (through Warner Bros. Television), and the film is now shown several times a year (rather than annually) on or just before several notable holidays (including Easter, the Fourth of July, Thanksgiving and/or Christmas). Turner Classic Movies cable channel, TNT and the TBS Superstation now often show the film during the same week "in rotation."[42]For the film's first nine telecasts, all on CBS, the film featured on-camera celebrity hosts, who provided commentary (often comic) and information about the making of the film. The hosts for these telecasts were a young Liza Minnelli, Bert Lahr, and Justin Schiller (Oz historian and the founder and first president of "The International Wizard Of Oz Club"), all hosting the first telecast, Red Skelton and his daughter Valentina, (the second telecast), Richard Boone and his son Peter (the third telecast), Dick Van Dyke and his children (the fourth and fifth telecasts), and Danny Kaye (the sixth, seventh, eighth, and ninth telecasts).[43][44][45][46][47]The Wizard of Oz was among the first videocassettes released by MGM/CBS Home Video in 1980;[48] all current home video releases are by Warner Home Video (via current rights holder Turner Entertainment). The first laserdisc release of The Wizard of Oz was in 1982, with two versions of a second, (one from Turner and one from The Criterion Collection with a commentary track) for the 50th Anniversary release in 1989, a third in 1991, a fourth in 1993, a fifth in 1995 and a sixth and final laserdisc release on September 11, 1996.[49]The first DVD release of the film was on March 26, 1997 by MGM and contained no special features or supplements. It was re-released by Warner Bros. for its 60th Anniversary on October 19, 1999, in snapper case packaging with its soundtrack presented in a new 5.1 surround sound mix. The monochrome-to-color transition was more smoothly accomplished by digitally keeping the inside of the house in monochrome while Dorothy and the reveal of Munchkinland are in color. The DVD also contained an extensive behind-the-scenes documentary: The Wonderful Wizard of Oz: The Making of a Movie Classic, produced in 1990 and hosted by Angela Lansbury, which was originally featured in the 1993 "Ultimate Oz" laserdisc box set release. Despite being a one-disc release, outtakes, the deleted "Jitterbug" musical number, clips of pre-1939 Oz adaptations, trailers, newsreels and a portrait gallery were also included, as well as two radio programs of the era publicizing the film.In 2005, two new DVD editions were released, both featuring a newly restored version of the film with audio commentary and an isolated music and effects track. One of the two DVD releases was a "Two-Disc Special Edition", featuring production documentaries, trailers, various outtakes, newsreels, radio shows and still galleries. The other set, a "Three-Disc Collector's Edition", included these features as well as the digitally restored 80th anniversary edition of the 1925 feature-length silent film version of The Wizard of Oz, other silent Oz movies, and a 1933 animated short version.The Wizard of Oz was released on Blu-ray Disc on September 29, 2009 for the film's 70th anniversary in a four-disc "Ultimate Collector's Edition", including all the bonus features from the 2005 Collector's Edition DVD, new bonus features about Victor Fleming and the surviving Munchkins, the telefilm The Dreamer of Oz: The L. Frank Baum Story and the miniseries MGM: When the Lion Roars. The Blu-ray Disc version of Oz features a significant picture quality increase over all previous home video releases due to Warner commissioning a new transfer at 8K resolution from the original film negatives, a feat which required 22 terabytes of storage space. This master was then used to create the 22 gigabyte 1080p encode for the Blu-ray Disc which runs at an average 23 Mbit/s bitrate using the VC-1 codec. This restored version also features a lossless 5.1 Dolby TrueHD audio track.[50] A DVD version was also released as a Two-Disc Special Edition and a Five-Disc Ultimate Collector's Edition. As previously mentioned, the September 23, 2009 one-day-only theatrical 70th anniversary showings were also a promotion for the various disc releases six days later.On December 1, 2009,[citation needed] three discs of the Ultimate Collector's Edition Blu-ray Disc were repackaged as a less expensive "Emerald Edition," with an Emerald Edition four-disc DVD arriving the following week. A single-disc Blu-ray, containing the restored movie and all the extra features of the two-disc Special Edition DVD, also became available on March 16, 2010.[citation needed]The Wizard of Oz is widely noted for its musical selections and soundtrack. Music & lyrics were by Harold Arlen and E.Y. "Yip" Harburg, who won the Academy Awards for Best Music Song for "Over the Rainbow." In addition, Herbert Stothart, who composed the instrumental underscore, won the Academy Award for Best Original Score. Georgie Stoll was associate conductor and screen credit was given to George Bassman, Murray Cutter, Ken Darby and Paul Marquardt for orchestral and vocal arrangements. (As usual Roger Edens was also heavily involved as an unbilled musical associate to Freed).The song "The Jitterbug", written in a swing style, was intended for the sequence in which the four are journeying to the castle of the Wicked Witch of the West. Due to time constraints, the song was cut from the final theatrical version. The film footage for the song has been lost (because no longer does the actual motion-picture footage exist), although silent home film footage of rehearsals for the number has survived. The sound recording for the song, however, is intact and was included in the 2-CD Rhino Records deluxe edition of the film soundtrack, as well as on the VHS and DVD editions of the film. A reference to "The Jitterbug" remains in the film: the Witch remarks to her flying monkeys that they should have no trouble apprehending Dorothy and her friends because "I've sent a little insect on ahead to take the fight out of them."Another musical number that was cut before release occurred right after the Wicked Witch of the West was melted and before Dorothy and her friends returned to the Wizard. This was a reprise of "Ding! Dong! The Witch is Dead" (blended with "We're Off to See the Wizard" and "The Merry Old Land of Oz") with the lyrics altered to "Hail! Hail! The Witch is Dead!." This started with the Witch's guard saying "Hail to Dorothy! The Wicked Witch is dead!" and dissolved to a huge celebration of the citizens of Emerald City singing the song as they accompany Dorothy and her friends to see the Wizard. Today, the film of this scene is also presumed lost and only a few stills survive along with a few seconds of footage used on several reissue trailers. The entire audio still exists and is included on the 2-CD Rhino Record deluxe edition of the film soundtrack.[51]In addition, a brief reprise of Over the Rainbow was intended to be sung by Garland while Dorothy is trapped in the Witch's castle, but it was cut because it was too emotionally intense. The original soundtrack recording still exists, however, and was included as an extra in the 2005 DVD release.[52]The songs were recorded in a studio before filming. Several of the recordings were completed while Buddy Ebsen was still with the cast. Therefore, while Ebsen had to be dropped from the cast due to illness from the aluminum powder makeup, his singing voice remained in the soundtrack. [as noted in the notes for the CD Deluxe Edition] In the group vocals of "We're Off to See the Wizard," his voice is easy to detect. Jack Haley spoke with a distinct Boston accent and thus did not pronounce the r in wizard. By contrast, Ebsen was a Midwesterner, like Judy Garland, and thus pronounced it. Of course, Haley rerecorded Ebsen's solo parts later.An arranged version of "Night on Bald Mountain" is played during the scene where the Scarecrow, the Tin Man, and the Cowardly Lion rescue Dorothy from the Wicked Witch of the West's castle.The film was nominated for several Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Visual Effects. In the Best Picture category, it lost to another MGM film, Gone with the Wind, another film directed by Victor Fleming. E.Y. Harburg and Harold Arlen won the award for Best Song (Over The Rainbow) and Best Original Music Score; composer Herbert Stothart received the Best Original Score Award. Garland received a special Academy Juvenile Award that year, for "Best Performances by a Juvenile" (the award was also for her role in the film version of Babes in Arms). The Wizard of Oz did not receive an Oscar for its special effects that award went to the 1939 film version of The Rains Came. Additional nominations went to Cedric Gibbons and William A. Horning for Art Direction, and Hal Rosson for Cinematography (color), but both of those awards were won by Gone With the Wind. There was no award for makeup then, so Jack Dawn could not receive an award for his detailed makeup for the Oz fantasy characters.In June 2008, AFI revealed its "Ten top Ten"the best ten American films in ten genresafter polling over 1,500 film artists, critics and historians. The Wizard of Oz was acknowledged as the best film in the fantasy genre.[53][54]The film is among the top ten of the BFI list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14.[55]The Wizard of Oz was dramatized as a one-hour radio play on the December 25, 1950 broadcast of Lux Radio Theater, with Judy Garland reprising her earlier role. An official sequel, the animated Journey Back to Oz, starring Liza Minnelli, daughter of Judy Garland, as Dorothy, was produced beginning in 1964 to commemorate the original film's 25th anniversary.[63] It also featured Margaret Hamilton, who previously played the Wicked Witch, as Aunt Em. The unfinished film lost financing early on and was not finished until 1972 when the producing studio, Filmation, had made enough profit from its television series to finish the film. It was released in the USA in 1974, and again in 1976 with additional live-action footage.In 1975, the stage show The Wiz premiered on Broadway. It was an African American version of The Wizard of Oz reworked for the Broadway stage. It starred Stephanie Mills and other Broadway stars and earned Tony awards. The play's financing was handled by actor Geoffrey Holder. The play inspired revivals after it left the stage and a motion picture made in 1978, starring Diana Ross as Dorothy and Michael Jackson as the Scarecrow.Walt Disney Pictures made an unofficial sequel, Return to Oz, in 1985. Based mostly on the books Ozma of Oz and The Marvelous Land of Oz, it fared poorly with critics and in the box office, although it has since gone on to become a cult classic.[64]In 1964, a one-hour animated cartoon, also called Return to Oz, was shown as an afternoon weekend special on NBC.For the film's 56th anniversary, a stage show also entitled The Wizard of Oz was based upon the 1939 film and the book by L. Frank Baum. It toured from 19952012, except for 2004 (see The Wizard of Oz (1987 stage play)).In 1990, an animated TV series also called The Wizard of Oz plays as a sequel to the film, though not officially, with Dorothy returning to Oz to help her friends protect the Wizard from the resurrected Wicked Witch of the West. The series incorrectly made Oz a real place, as in the books, rather than a dream like in the film. Produced by DiC it was created to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the film.In 1995, Gregory Maguire published the book Wicked: The Life and Times of the Wicked Witch of the West (which was later adapted into the Tony Award winning Broadway musical Wicked), a back story to the film and novel that describes what happened before Dorothy dropped into Oz.Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice wrote a musical based on the film, which is also titled The Wizard of Oz. The musical opened in 2011 at the West End's London Palladium. It features all of the songs from the film plus new songs written by Lloyd Webber and Rice. Lloyd Webber also found Danielle Hope to play Dorothy on the reality show, Over the Rainbow. Another production of the musical is expected to open in December 2012 at the Ed Mirvish Theatre in Toronto.[65] A reality TV show, also entitled Over the Rainbow, found a Canadian girl, Danielle Wade, to play the role of Dorothy.[66][67]An unofficial telling of the events after The Wizard of Oz was filmed in 2010. The movie was titled After the Wizard and was written and directed by Hugh Gross. It was released on DVD on August 7, 2012.An animated film called Tom and Jerry and the Wizard of Oz was released in 2011 by Warner Home Video, incorporating Tom and Jerry into the story as Dorothy's "protectors".A prequel to The Wizard of Oz, Oz: The Great and Powerful is scheduled to be released on March 8, 2013. It will be directed by Sam Raimi and released by Walt Disney Pictures, the second film based on Baum's Oz series to be produced by Disney. The film stars James Franco, Mila Kunis, and Michelle Williams.All of the film's stars except Frank Morgan, who died in 1949, lived long enough to see and enjoy at least some of the film's legendary reputation after it came to television. The last of the major players to die was Ray Bolger, in 1987. The day after his death, an editorial cartoon referenced the cultural impact of this film, portraying the Scarecrow running along the Yellow Brick Road to catch up with the other characters, as they all danced off into the sunset. Billie Burke died in 1970, Jack Haley in 1979, and Margaret Hamilton in 1985.Despite his near-death experience with the aluminum-powder makeup, Buddy Ebsen outlived all his principal cast members by at least sixteen years, although his film career was damaged by the incident. Because of his illness, followed by his subsequent service in the Coast Guard, his career did not fully recover until the 1950s, when he began a string of popular film and TV series appearances, notably the Disney Davy Crockett films and the popular TV series The Beverly Hillbillies, that would continue into the 1980s. Although his lungs had presumably recovered from the effects of the powder makeup, he eventually died of complications from pneumonia on July 6, 2003 at the age of ninety-five.[68]Director Victor Fleming, music arranger Herbert Stothart, screenwriter Edgar Allan Woolf, film editor Blanche Sewell, and actor Charley Grapewin (who played Uncle Henry) did not live to see the film's first telecast. By coincidence, Fleming, Stothart, Sewell and Morgan all died in 1949, which was also the year of the film's successful first re-release in movie theatres. Woolf had died the year before and Grapewin died in February 1956, nine months before the film's television premiere, and a few months after the film's second re-release. Costume designer Adrian died in September 1959, only three months before the highly successful second telecast of the film, the one that would persuade CBS to make it an annual tradition. The film's principal art director Cedric Gibbons died in July 1960, after the 1959 telecast, but only five months before the next TV showing on December 11, 1960.[69] And principal makeup artist Jack Dawn died in June 1961, six months after the film's third telecast. Bert Lahr died in December 1967. As the 1960s ended, Judy Garland joined them: she died in London on June 22, 1969 at the age of 47 from a drug overdose before a scheduled concert appearance.Co-screenwriter Florence Ryerson died in 1965, after the film's seventh telecast, and principal screenwriter Noel Langley, who reportedly hated the changes that Ryerson and Edgar Allan Woolf had made to his version of the script,[70] but was later reconciled to them,[71] lived to see the film become a television institution. He died in 1980, months after the twenty-second telecast of the film. Oz songwriters E.Y. Harburg and Harold Arlen also lived to see the film become a television immortal, both of them also passing away in the 1980s, as did Oz director of photography Harold Rosson. A. Arnold Gillespie, the principal creator of the special effects which were so much a part of the film, died in 1978.Regarding the original Baum storybook, it has been said: "The Wonderful Wizard of Oz is America's greatest and best-loved home grown fairytale. The first totally American fantasy for children, it is one of the most-read children's books . . . and despite its many particularly American attributes, including a wizard from Omaha, The Wonderful Wizard of Oz has universal appeal."[72]The film also has been deemed "culturally significant" by the United States Library of Congress, which selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry in 1989. In June 2007, the film was listed on UNESCO's Memory of the World Register.[73] The film placed at number 86 on Bravo's 100 Scariest Movie Moments.[74] In 1977, Aljean Harmetz wrote The Making of The Wizard of Oz, a detailed description of the creation of the film based on interviews and research; it was updated in 1989.[75] Quotes from the film can be heard in many different style films such as The Matrix, Avatar, and Twister, as well as in numerous television shows.In a 2009 retrospective article about The Wizard of Oz, San Francisco Chronicle film critic and author Mick LaSalle declared that the film's "entire [Munchkinland] sequence, from Dorothy's arrival in Oz to her departure on the Yellow Brick Road, has to be one of the greatest in cinema history a masterpiece of set design, costuming, choreography, music, lyrics, storytelling and sheer imagination.".[76]Several quotes have made the AFI's 100 Years Top 100 Movies Quotes:Because of their iconic stature,[77] the ruby slippers worn by Judy Garland in The Wizard of Oz are now among the most treasured and valuable film memorabilia in movie history.[78] The silver slippers that Dorothy wore in the book series were changed to ruby to take advantage of the new Technicolor process. Gilbert Adrian, MGM's chief costume designer, was responsible for the final design. A number of pairs were made, though no one knows exactly how many.After filming, the shoes were stored among the studio's extensive collection of costumes and faded from attention. They were found in the basement of MGM's wardrobe department during preparations for a mammoth auction in 1970. One pair was the highlight of the auction, going for a then unheard of $15,000 to an anonymous buyer, who apparently donated them to the Smithsonian in 1979. Four other pairs are known to exist; one sold for $666,000 at auction in 2000. A pair stolen from the Judy Garland Museum in Minnesota is still missing.[79] Another, differently styled pair not used in the film has been put up for auction with the rest of her collections by owner actress Debbie Reynolds.An old urban legend claimed that, in the film, a Munchkin could be seen committing suicide (hanging by the neck from behind a prop tree and swinging back and forth) far away (left) in the background, while Dorothy, the Scarecrow, and the Tin Man are singing "We're Off to See the Wizard" and skipping down the Yellow Brick Road into the distance. The object in question is actually a bird borrowed from the Los Angeles Zoo, most likely a crane or an emu, one of several placed on the indoor set to give it a more realistic feel.[80][81][82][83][84][85]The pairing of the 1973 Pink Floyd music album The Dark Side of the Moon with the visual portion of the film produces moments where they appear to correspond with each other in a music video-like experience. This juxtaposition has been called Dark Side of the Rainbow.[86]The Wizard of Oz is alleged to have been identified as being of importance to the LGBT community, in part due to Judy Garland's starring role.[87]Attempts have been made to determine the film's impact on LGBT-identified persons: editors Corey K. Creekmur and Alexander Doty, in their introduction to Out in Culture: Gay, Lesbian and Queer Essays on Popular Culture (1995, Duke University Press), write that the film's gay resonance and interpretations depends entirely upon camp.[88] Some have attempted a more serious interpretation of the film: for example, Cassell's Encyclopedia of Queer Myth, Symbol and Spirit: Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and Transgender Lore quotes therapist Robert Hopcke as saying that the dreary reality of Kansas implies the presence of homophobia and is contrasted with the colorful and accepting land of Oz.";[87] they state that when shown in gay venues, the film is "transformed into a rite celebrating acceptance and community.[87] Queer theorists have drawn parallels between LGBT people and characters in the film, specifically pointing to the characters' double lives and Dorothy's longing "for a world in which her inner desires can be expressed freely and fully."[87]August 25, 1939(1939-08-25)1 Plot2 Voice cast3 Production

3.1 Development and pre-production
3.2 Casting
3.3 Filming
3.4 Post-production

3.1 Development and pre-production3.2 Casting3.3 Filming3.4 Post-production4 Release5 Reception6 Differences from the novel7 Re-releases8 Television

8.1 Home video

8.1 Home video9 Music

9.1 Song list

9.1 Song list10 Awards and honors

10.1 Other noted honors

10.1 Other noted honors11 Sequels and reinterpretations12 Legacy13 Cultural impact

13.1 Ruby slippers
13.2 Urban legends
13.3 Alleged impact upon the LGBT culture

13.1 Ruby slippers13.2 Urban legends13.3 Alleged impact upon the LGBT culture14 See also15 Notes16 References

16.1 Bibliography

16.1 Bibliography17 External links3.1 Development and pre-production3.2 Casting3.3 Filming3.4 Post-production8.1 Home video9.1 Song list10.1 Other noted honors13.1 Ruby slippers13.2 Urban legends13.3 Alleged impact upon the LGBT culture16.1 BibliographyJudy Garland as Dorothy GaleFrank Morgan as Professor Marvel / Doorman / Cabbie / Guard / The WizardRay Bolger as Hunk / ScarecrowJack Haley as Hickory / Tin ManBert Lahr as Zeke / Cowardly LionBillie Burke as Glinda the Good Witch of the NorthMargaret Hamilton as Miss Almira Gulch / The Wicked Witch of the WestClara Blandick as Aunt EmCharley Grapewin as Uncle HenryPat Walshe as Nikko (the Head Flying Monkey)Terry[Note 1] as TotoThe Singer Midgets as the MunchkinsJerry Maren as The Lollipop Kid/MunchkinMitchell Lewis as the Winkie Guard Captain (uncredited)"Over the Rainbow" - Judy Garland as Dorothy GaleMunchkinland Sequence:

"Come Out,..." - Billie Burke as Glinda and the Munchkins
"It Really Was No Miracle" - Judy Garland as Dorothy, Billy Bletcher, and the Munchkins
"We Thank You Very Sweetly" - Frank Cucksey and Joseph Koziel
"Ding Dong the Witch Is Dead" - Billie Burke as Glinda (speaking) and the Munchkins
"As Mayor of the Munchkin City"
"As Coroner, I Must Aver"
"Ding Dong the Witch Is Dead" (Reprise) - The Munchkins
"The Lullaby League"
"The Lollipop Guild"
"We Welcome You to Munchkinland" - The Munchkins

"Come Out,..." - Billie Burke as Glinda and the Munchkins"It Really Was No Miracle" - Judy Garland as Dorothy, Billy Bletcher, and the Munchkins"We Thank You Very Sweetly" - Frank Cucksey and Joseph Koziel"Ding Dong the Witch Is Dead" - Billie Burke as Glinda (speaking) and the Munchkins"As Mayor of the Munchkin City""As Coroner, I Must Aver""Ding Dong the Witch Is Dead" (Reprise) - The Munchkins"The Lullaby League""The Lollipop Guild""We Welcome You to Munchkinland" - The Munchkins"Follow the Yellow Brick Road/You're Off to See the Wizard" - Judy Garland as Dorothy and the Munchkins"If I Only Had a Brain" - Ray Bolger as the Scarecrow and Judy Garland as Dorothy"We're Off to See the Wizard" - Judy Garland as Dorothy and Ray Bolger as the Scarecrow"If I Only Had a Heart" - Jack Haley as the Tin Man"We're Off to See the Wizard" (Reprise 1) - Judy Garland as Dorothy, Ray Bolger as the Scarecrow, and Jack Haley as the Tin Man"If I Only Had the Nerve" - Bert Lahr as the Cowardly Lion, Jack Haley as the Tin Man, Ray Bolger as the Scarecrow, and Judy Garland as Dorothy"We're Off to See the Wizard" (Reprise 2) - Judy Garland as Dorothy, Ray Bolger as the Scarecrow, Jack Haley as the Tin Man, and Bert Lahr as the Cowardly Lion"Optimistic Voices" - MGM Studio Chorus"The Merry Old Land of Oz" - Frank Morgan as Cabby, Judy Garland as Dorothy, Ray Bolger as Scarecrow, Jack Haley as the Tin Man and Bert Lahr as the Cowardly Lion"If I Were King of the Forest" - Bert Lahr as the Cowardly Lion, Judy Garland as Dorothy, Ray Bolger as the Scarecrow, and Jack Haley as the Tin Man"The Jitterbug" - Although this song was taken out of the film, it is still available on some extended edition CD's."Come Out,..." - Billie Burke as Glinda and the Munchkins"It Really Was No Miracle" - Judy Garland as Dorothy, Billy Bletcher, and the Munchkins"We Thank You Very Sweetly" - Frank Cucksey and Joseph Koziel"Ding Dong the Witch Is Dead" - Billie Burke as Glinda (speaking) and the Munchkins"As Mayor of the Munchkin City""As Coroner, I Must Aver""Ding Dong the Witch Is Dead" (Reprise) - The Munchkins"The Lullaby League""The Lollipop Guild""We Welcome You to Munchkinland" - The MunchkinsAFI's 100 Years100 Movies - #6AFI's 100 Years100 Thrills - #43AFI's 100 Years100 Heroes and Villains:

The Wicked Witch of the West - #4 Villain

The Wicked Witch of the West - #4 VillainAFI's 100 Years100 Songs:

"Over the Rainbow" - #1
"Ding-Dong! The Witch Is Dead" - #82
"If I Only Had A Brain/Heart/The Nerve" - Nominated

"Over the Rainbow" - #1"Ding-Dong! The Witch Is Dead" - #82"If I Only Had A Brain/Heart/The Nerve" - NominatedAFI's 100 Years100 Movie Quotes:

"Toto, I've got a feeling we're not in Kansas anymore." - #4
"There's no place like home." - #23
"I'll get you, my pretty and your little dog, too!" - #99
"Lions and tigers and bears, oh my!" - Nominated
"I'm melting! Melting! Oh, what a world! What a world!" - Nominated
"Pay no attention to that man behind the curtain!" - Nominated

"Toto, I've got a feeling we're not in Kansas anymore." - #4"There's no place like home." - #23"I'll get you, my pretty and your little dog, too!" - #99"Lions and tigers and bears, oh my!" - Nominated"I'm melting! Melting! Oh, what a world! What a world!" - Nominated"Pay no attention to that man behind the curtain!" - NominatedAFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - NominatedAFI's 100 Years of Musicals - #3AFI's 100 Years100 Cheers - #26AFI's 100 Years100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #10AFI's 10 Top 10 - #1 Fantasy filmThe Wicked Witch of the West - #4 Villain"Over the Rainbow" - #1"Ding-Dong! The Witch Is Dead" - #82"If I Only Had A Brain/Heart/The Nerve" - Nominated"Toto, I've got a feeling we're not in Kansas anymore." - #4"There's no place like home." - #23"I'll get you, my pretty and your little dog, too!" - #99"Lions and tigers and bears, oh my!" - Nominated"I'm melting! Melting! Oh, what a world! What a world!" - Nominated"Pay no attention to that man behind the curtain!" - Nominated1999 Rolling Stone's 100 Maverick Movies ranked #20.[56]1999 Entertainment Weekly's 100 Greatest Films ranked #32.[57]2000 The Village Voice's 100 Best Films of the 20th Century ranked #14.[58]2002 Sight & Sound's Greatest Film Poll of Directors ranked #41.[59]2005 Total Film's 100 Greatest Films #83.[60]2007 Total Film's 23 Weirdest Films ranked #1.[61]2007 The Observer ranked the film's songs and music at the top of its list of 50 greatest film soundtracks.[62]Memories of a Munchkin: An Illustrated Walk Down the Yellow Brick Road by Meinhardt Raabe and Daniel Kinske (Back Stage Books, 2005) ISBN 0-8230-9193-7Ruby Slippers of Oz, The by Rhys Thomas (Tale Weaver, 1989) ISBN 0-942139-09-7 ISBN 978-0-942139-09-9Wizardry of Oz, The: The Artistry And Magic of The 1939 MGM Classic Revised and Expanded by Jay Scarfone and William Stillman (Applause Books, 2004) ISBN 0-517-20333-2 ISBN 978-0-517-20333-0The Munchkins of Oz by Stephen Cox (Cumberland House, 1996) ISBN 1-58182-269-3 ISBN 978-1-58182-269-4"Did these stories really happen?" by Michelle Bernier (Createspace, 2010) ISBN 1-4505-8536-1Official websiteWizard of Oz Film Site With Oz Community InterviewsThe Wizard of Oz at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Wizard of Oz at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Wizard of Oz at AllRoviThe Wizard of Oz at Box Office MojoThe Wizard of Oz at Rotten TomatoesThe Wizard of Oz on Oz Wiki,  an external wikithe Judy Room (Oz Section)Script before cutsThe Wizard of Oz on Lux Radio Theater: December 25, 1950The Graduate is a 1967 American comedy-drama film directed by Mike Nichols.[2] It is based on the 1963 novel The Graduate by Charles Webb, who wrote it shortly after graduating from Williams College. The screenplay was by Buck Henry, who makes a cameo appearance as a hotel clerk, and Calder Willingham. The film tells the story of Benjamin Braddock (played by Dustin Hoffman), a recent university graduate with no well-defined aim in life, who is seduced by an older woman, Mrs. Robinson (Anne Bancroft), and then proceeds to fall in love with her daughter Elaine (Katharine Ross).In 1996, The Graduate was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". Initially, the film was placed at #7 on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies list in 1998. When AFI revised the list in 2007, the film was moved to #17.Adjusted for inflation, the film is #21 on the list of highest-grossing films in the United States and Canada.[3]Benjamin Braddock, who will soon turn 21, returns to his parents' home in Southern California after graduating from a college on the East Coast. At his graduation party, all his parents' friends want to know about Benjamin's upcoming plans for graduate school or a career, something about which Benjamin is clearly uncomfortable and anxious. His parents ignore his anxiety and are only interested in talking about his academic and athletic successes and their plans for him to attend graduate school.Mrs. Robinson, the wife of his father's law partner, asks Benjamin to drive her home from the party. She invites Benjamin inside and attempts to seduce him, removing her clothes. She tells Benjamin, who becomes increasingly nervous, that she finds him attractive and wants him to know that she is available to him anytime. Mr. Robinson arrives home but neither sees nor suspects anything. He advises Benjamin that he should relax and enjoy his youth while he still can. A few days later, Benjamin contacts Mrs. Robinson and clumsily organizes a tryst at a hotel, and the two begin an affair.Benjamin spends the summer floating in a pool by day and meeting Mrs. Robinson at the hotel at night. Through their encounters, Benjamin discovers that they have nothing in common but also learns that Mrs. Robinson was forced to give up college and marry someone she did not love when she became pregnant with her daughter, Elaine.However, under increasing pressure from his parents to begin a career or enroll in grad school, Benjamin is set up on a date with Elaine, whom Benjamin last saw in high school, by his father and Mr. Robinson. Although Mrs. Robinson has made it clear to Benjamin that he is to have nothing to do with Elaine, Benjamin eventually succumbs to the pressure and takes Elaine out on a date. During the course of their date, Benjamin goes out of his way to mistreat and be rude to Elaine, even going as far as taking her to a lewd strip joint, in order to sabotage the evening. As Elaine begins to sob, Benjamin explains his motives and that he only asked her out on a date as an obligation from each of their fathers. The two reconcile and each discover that they are able to discuss their current worries and their plans for future happiness.Upon Benjamin's arriving at the Robinsons' home to take Elaine out again, Mrs. Robinson threatens to reveal to Elaine her earlier relationship with Benjamin. However, Benjamin preemptively blurts out the details of his affair to Elaine before Mrs. Robinson can make good on her threat. Upset and heartbroken, Elaine returns to Berkeley and severs all communication with Benjamin.Benjamin resolves that he must marry Elaine, and follows her to Berkeley. There, he interrupts a date between Elaine and a classmate, Carl. Later that evening, Elaine confronts Benjamin, asking what he is doing there after having raped her mother while she was drunk. Benjamin reveals his side of the story to Elaine and that he was the one who was pursued by Mrs. Robinson, which further upsets Elaine. Benjamin tells Elaine he will leave her alone, but Elaine asks him to remain.The following day, Elaine confronts Benjamin again and asks him to kiss her. Although Benjamin wants to marry Elaine and presses her to obtain a blood test so they can wed, Elaine laments that she has already told Carl that she might marry him. Mr. Robinson, who has learned about his wife's affair with Benjamin, goes to Benjamin's apartment in Berkeley and berates him, threatening to have him prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law should Benjamin ever come near Elaine again. He forces Elaine to drop out of school and takes her away to marry Carl. Elaine leaves Benjamin a note saying that although she loves him, her father's anger would never lead to Benjamin's acceptance as Elaine's husband.Benjamin races back to Pasadena looking for Elaine but finds Mrs. Robinson, who tells him he cannot stop the wedding. Benjamin learns from Carl's fraternity brothers that the wedding is taking place in Santa Barbara. En route to the church, his car runs out of gas, forcing him to run the final few blocks to the chapel, arriving just as Elaine and Carl are about to kiss. Watching from the loft at the back of the church, Benjamin bangs on the glass window and screams, "Elaine!" several times, attempting to stop the ceremony. With some hesitation, Elaine returns a cry of "Ben!" and rushes toward Benjamin. A brawl breaks out as everyone tries to stop her and Benjamin from leaving. Elaine manages to break free from her mother, who claims "It's too late!", to which Elaine replies, "Not for me!" Benjamin and Elaine escape the chapel, by using a wooden cross on the double chapel doors, thereby trapping the people in. Then they flag down a bus. After making their way to the back seat of the bus as it pulls away, Elaine in her wedding dress and Benjamin in tattered clothing, they both initially appear ecstatic about their dramatic escape. Gradually however, this exhilaration disappears with Benjamin just looking forward and Elaine occasionally looking at Benjamin. In the closing shot, Elaine and Benjamin are shown through the rear window sitting at the back of the bus as it travels down the road.The theme of an innocent and confused youth who is exploited, mis-directed, seduced (literally and figuratively) and betrayed by a corrupt, decadent, and discredited older generation (that finds its stability in "plastics") was well understood by film audiences and captured the spirit of the times. One of the film's posters proclaimed the difficult coming-of-age for the recent, aimless college graduate.Uncredited:According to TCM host Robert Osborne, "Mike Nichols wanted Doris Day for Mrs. Robinson, Robert Redford for Benjamin Braddock and Gene Hackman for Mr. Robinson." But there were numerous actors and actresses considered, tested, or wanted roles in the film.Day turned down the offer because she believed the film was not for her. Nichols' actual first choice for Mrs. Robinson was French actress Jeanne Moreau. The idea behind this was that in the French culture, the "older" women tended to "train" the younger men in sexual matters. Joan Crawford inquired as to play the part, while Ingrid Bergman and Audrey Hepburn both wanted the role. Patricia Neal turned down the film as she had recently recovered from a stroke and did not feel ready to accept such a major role. Geraldine Page also turned it down. Other actresses considered for the part included Claire Bloom, Angie Dickinson, Judy Garland, Rita Hayworth, Jennifer Jones, Deborah Kerr, Eva Marie Saint, Simone Signoret, Jean Simmons, Lana Turner, and Shelley Winters. Angela Lansbury also asked about playing the part. Ava Gardner sought the role of Mrs. Robinson, and reportedly called Nichols saying,"I want to see you! I want to talk about this Graduate thing!". Nichols did not seriously consider her for the role (he wanted a younger woman as Bancroft was 36 and Gardner was 45), but did end up visiting her hotel. He later recounted that "she sat at a little French desk with a telephone, she went through every movie star clich. She said, 'All right, let's talk about your movie. First of all, I strip for nobody.'" Meanwhile, Jane Fonda turned down not only the role of Mrs. Robinson, but also that of Elaine.For the role of Benjamin, Robert Redford and Warren Beatty were among the top choices. Beatty turned the film down as he was occupied with Bonnie and Clyde. Redford tested for the part of Benjamin (with Candice Bergen as Elaine), but Nichols thought that Redford did not possess the underdog quality that Benjamin needed. When Mike Nichols talked with Redford, Redford asked what he meant. "Well, let's put it this way," said Nichols, "Have you ever struck out with a girl?" "What do you mean?" asked Redford. "That's precisely my point," said Nichols. Charles Grodin turned down the part as the money was not right. Both Brandon deWilde and Michael Parks auditioned for the role. In addition, Keir Dullea, Robert Duvall, Harrison Ford, George Hamilton, Steve McQueen, Jack Nance, George Peppard, Anthony Perkins, Robert Wagner, and Jack Nicholson were all considered for the part of Benjamin. Burt Ward, who starred as Robin on the Batman television show, had to pass on the role as he was committed to filming the show, and the studio would not lend him any way.For the character of Elaine, casting was also problematic. Patty Duke turned down the part as she did not want to work at the time. Sally Field as well as Shirley MacLaine refused the role as well. Raquel Welch and Joan Collins both wanted the role, but did not succeed in getting it. Carroll Baker tested, but was said to be too old to be Anne Bancroft's daughter. Candice Bergen screen-tested as well, as did Goldie Hawn and Natalie Wood. On the other hand, Ann-Margret, Elizabeth Ashley, Karen Carpenter, Carol Lynley, Sue Lyon, Yvette Mimieux, Suzanne Pleshette, Lee Remick, Pamela Tiffin, and Tuesday Weld were all on the director's shortlist before Katharine Ross was cast.In the roles of Mr. Robinson, Gene Hackman was originally cast, but just before filming began, the director decided he was too young and decided to replace him. Marlon Brando, Howard Duff, Brian Keith, Jack Palance, Frank Sinatra, and Gregory Peck were all other choices for the role that Murray Hamilton eventually played. Susan Hayward was the first choice for Benjamin's mother, Mrs. Baddock, but the role was given to Elizabeth Wilson. And to play Mr. Braddock, Yul Brynner, Kirk Douglas, Robert Mitchum, and Ronald Reagan all came close to getting the role that ended up going to William Daniels.There are considerable age discrepancies between the lead roles and the actors who portrayed them. Benjamin Braddock says, "next week I will be 21"; at the time of filming, Dustin Hoffman was 30. Mrs. Robinson states, "Benjamin, I am twice your age." Anne Bancroft was 36, only six years older than Hoffman. Mrs. Robinson's daughter Elaine is 19 and was portrayed by Katharine Ross, who was 27 at the time.Many of the exterior shots of Benjamin on the campus were actually filmed on the brick campus of USC in Los Angeles.[4] Other scenes were filmed on the Berkeley campus, on Durant Avenue in Berkeley, and on Telegraph Avenue.The Taft Hotel scenes were filmed at the Ambassador Hotel.The church used for the wedding scene is actually the United Methodist Church in La Verne. In a commentary audio released with the 40th anniversary DVD, Hoffman revealed that he was uneasy about the scene in which he pounds on the church window, as the minister of the church had been watching the filming disapprovingly. The residences used for the Braddocks' house and the Robinsons' house were located on North Palm Drive in Beverly Hills. The scene with Benjamin and Elaine at night in his car at the drive-in restaurant was filmed in Westwood Village in Los Angeles.The scenes of Benjamin driving to Berkeley on the San Francisco  Oakland Bay Bridge were filmed on the top level of the bridge leading into San Francisco the opposite direction of Berkeley. In another scene as he drives south to Santa Barbara, his sports car is shown heading north through the Gaviota Tunnel, also the wrong direction.The film boosted the profile of folk-rock duo Simon & Garfunkel. Originally, Nichols and O'Steen used their existing songs like "The Sound of Silence" merely as a pacing device for the editing until Nichols decided that substituting original music would not be effective and decided to include them on the soundtrack, an unusual move at that time.[5]According to a Variety article by Peter Bart in the 15 May 2005 issue, Lawrence Turman, his producer, then made a deal for Simon to write three new songs for the movie. By the time they had nearly finished editing the film, Simon had only written one new song. Nichols begged him for more, but Simon, who was touring constantly, told him he did not have the time. He did play him a few notes of a new song he had been working on; "It's not for the movie... it's a song about times past about Mrs. Roosevelt and Joe DiMaggio and stuff." Nichols advised Simon, "It's now about Mrs. Robinson, not Mrs. Roosevelt."[6]On the strength of the hit single "Mrs. Robinson", the soundtrack album rose to the top of the charts in 1968 (knocking off The Beatles' White Album). However, the version that appears in the film is markedly different from the hit single version, which would not be issued until Simon and Garfunkel's next album, Bookends. The actual film version of "Mrs. Robinson" does appear on The Graduate soundtrack LP.A.D. Murphy of Variety and Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times praised the film upon its release, with Murphy describing it as a "delightful satirical comedy-drama"[7] and Ebert claiming it was the "funniest American comedy of the year".[8]For the film's thirtieth anniversary reissue, Roger Ebert retracted some of his previous praise for the film, noting that he now felt its time has passed and he now had more sympathy for Mrs. Robinson than Benjamin, whom he considered "an insufferable creep."[9] He, along with Gene Siskel, gave the film a mediocre review on the television program Siskel & Ebert.[10]Anne Bancroft, Dustin Hoffman, and Katharine Ross earned Oscar nominations for their performances.Along with the acting nominations, the film received nominations for Best Cinematography, Best Adapted Screenplay, and Best Picture. Mike Nichols won the Academy Award for Best Director.The film won the BAFTA Award for Best Film, as well as the BAFTA Award for Best Editing (to Sam O'Steen).In 1996, The Graduate was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant", and placed #21 on the list of highest-grossing films in the United States and Canada, adjusted for inflation.[3]American Film Institute recognitionThe film is listed in the 1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die book.[11]Alfa Romeo produced a "Graduate" edition Alfa Romeo Spider, the car Benjamin drives in the film.[citation needed]Terry Johnson's adaptation of the original novel and the movie was a hit both in London's West End and on Broadway, and has toured the United States. There is a Brazilian version adapted by Miguel Falabella. Several actresses have starred as Mrs. Robinson, including Kathleen Turner, Lorraine Bracco, Jerry Hall, Amanda Donohoe, Morgan Fairchild, Anne Archer, Vera Fischer and Linda Gray. The Broadway production in 2002 starred Kathleen Turner, Jason Biggs, and Alicia Silverstone.The stage production adds several scenes that are not in the novel or the film. It also uses songs by Simon & Garfunkel not used in the film, such as "Baby Driver" as well as music from other popular musicians from the era such as The Byrds and The Beach Boys.Charles Webb has written a sequel to his original novel titled Home School, but initially refused to publish it in its entirety because of a contract he signed in the 1960s. When he sold film rights to The Graduate, he surrendered the rights to any sequels. If he were to publish Home School, Canal+, the French media company that owns the rights to The Graduate, would be able to adapt it for the screen without his permission.[12] Extracts of Home School were printed in The Times on May 2, 2006.[13] Webb also told the newspaper that there was a possibility he would find a publisher for the full text, provided he could retrieve the film rights using French copyright law.[14] On 30 May 2006, The Times reported that Webb had signed a publishing deal for Home School with Random House which he hoped would enable him to instruct French lawyers to attempt to retrieve his rights. The novel was published in Britain in 2007[15] but was poorly received.[16][17]December 21, 1967(1967-12-21)1 Plot2 Theme3 Cast4 Production

4.1 Casting
4.2 Filming locations
4.3 Music

4.1 Casting4.2 Filming locations4.3 Music5 Critical evaluation6 Awards and honors7 Stage adaptation8 Possibility of sequel9 Further reading10 Notes11 External links4.1 Casting4.2 Filming locations4.3 MusicAnne Bancroft as Mrs. RobinsonDustin Hoffman as Benjamin BraddockKatharine Ross as Elaine RobinsonWilliam Daniels as Mr. BraddockMurray Hamilton as Mr. RobinsonElizabeth Wilson as Mrs. BraddockBuck Henry as Hotel ClerkWalter Brooke as Mr. McGuireBrian Avery as Carl SmithNorman Fell as Mr. McCleeryMarion Lorne as Singleman party guestAlice Ghostley as Singleman party guestMike Farrell as a bellhop at the hotelRichard Dreyfuss as Boarding House ResidentBen Murphy as the shaving student in the fraternity houseKevin Tighe as Carter, Carl Smith's fraternity brotherEve McVeagh as party guestHamilton Camp as Second Hotel ClerkDonald F. Glut as College StudentElaine May as Girl with Note for BenjaminThurl Ravenscroft as Man with the Guests at Benjamin's Backyard1998: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #72000: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs - #92002: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions - #522004: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs:

"Mrs. Robinson" - #6

"Mrs. Robinson" - #62005: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Plastics." - #42
"Mrs. Robinson, you're trying to seduce me. Aren't you?" - #63

"Plastics." - #42"Mrs. Robinson, you're trying to seduce me. Aren't you?" - #632007: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #17"Mrs. Robinson" - #6"Plastics." - #42"Mrs. Robinson, you're trying to seduce me. Aren't you?" - #63J. W. Whitehead. Appraising The Graduate: The Mike Nichols Classic and Its Impact in Hollywood. McFarland, 2011. ISBN 978-0-7864-6306-0.Official websiteThe Graduate at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Graduate at Rotten TomatoesThe Graduate at Box Office MojoMaking of article in Vanity Fair magazine[2]On the Waterfront is a 1954 American crime drama film about union violence and corruption among longshoremen. The film was directed by Elia Kazan and written by Budd Schulberg. It stars Marlon Brando, Karl Malden, Lee J. Cobb, Rod Steiger and Eva Marie Saint. The soundtrack score was composed by Leonard Bernstein. It is based on a series of articles written in the New York Sun by Malcolm Johnson.The film received eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor and Best Director. It is Leonard Bernstein's only original film score not adapted from a stage production with songs.On the Waterfront was based on a 24-part series of articles in the New York Sun by Malcolm Johnson, titled "Crime on the Waterfront". The series won the 1949 Pulitzer Prize for Local Reporting. The stories detailed widespread corruption, extortion and racketeering on the waterfront of Manhattan and Brooklyn.Mob-connected union boss Johnny Friendly (Lee J. Cobb) gloats about his iron-fisted control of the waterfront. The police and the Waterfront Crime Commission know that Friendly is behind a number of murders, but witnesses play "D and D" ("deaf and dumb"), accepting their subservient position rather than risk the danger and shame of informing.Terry Malloy (Marlon Brando) is a dockworker whose brother Charley (Rod Steiger) is Friendly's right hand man. Some years earlier, Terry had been a promising boxer until Friendly had Charley instruct him to deliberately lose a fight that he could have won, so that Friendly could win money betting against him.Terry is used to coax a popular dockworker, Joey Doyle (Ben Wagner), out to an ambush, preventing him from testifying against Friendly before the Crime Commission. Terry resents being used as a tool in Joey's death but is still willing to remain "D and D". Terry meets and is smitten by the murdered Joey Doyle's sister, Edie (Eva Marie Saint), who has shamed "waterfront priest" Father Barry (Karl Malden) into fomenting action against the mob-controlled union.Soon both Edie and Father Barry are urging Terry to testify. Another dockworker, Kayo Dugan, who agrees to testify after Father Barry's promise of unwavering support, ends up dead after Friendly arranges for him to be crushed by a load of whiskey in a staged accident.As Terry, tormented by his awakening conscience, increasingly leans toward testifying, Friendly decides that Terry must be killed unless Charley can coerce him into keeping quiet. Charley tries bribing Terry with a good job, and finally threatens him by holding a gun up against him, but recognizes he has failed to sway Terry, who places the blame for his own downward spiral on his well-off brother. In one of the most famous scenes in film history, Terry reminds Charley that if it had not been for the fixed fight, "I coulda been a contender." Charley gives Terry a gun and advises him to run. Friendly has been spying on the situation, so he has Charley murdered, his body hanged in an alley as bait to get at Terry. Terry sets out to shoot Friendly, but Father Barry obstructs that course of action and finally convinces Terry to fight Friendly by testifying.After the testimony, Friendly announces that Terry will not find employment anywhere on the waterfront. Edie tries to persuade him to leave the waterfront with her, but he nonetheless shows up during recruitment at the docks. When he is the only man not hired, Terry openly confronts Friendly, proclaiming that he is proud of what he did.Finally, the confrontation develops into a vicious brawl, with Terry getting the upper hand until Friendly's thugs gang up on Terry and beat him nearly to death. The dockworkers, who witnessed the confrontation, declare their support for Terry and refuse to work unless Terry is working too. Finally, the badly wounded Terry forces himself to his feet and enters the dock, followed by the other longshoremen despite Friendly's threats.On the Waterfront was filmed over 36 days on location in various places in Hoboken, New Jersey, including the docks, workers' slum dwellings, bars, littered alleys, rooftops. Furthermore, some of the labor boss's goons in the film  Abe Simon as Barney, Tony Galento as Truck and Tami Mauriello as Tullio  were actual former professional heavyweight boxers.Protagonist Terry Malloy's (Brando's) fight against corruption was in part modeled after whistle-blowing longshoreman Anthony DiVincenzo, who testified before a real-life Waterfront Commission on the facts of life on the Hoboken Docks and had suffered a degree of ostracism for his deed. DiVincenzo sued and settled, many years after, with Columbia Pictures over the appropriation of what he considered his story. DiVincenzo claimed to have recounted his story to screenwriter Budd Schulberg during a month-long session of waterfront barroom meetings. Schulberg attended Di Vincenzo's waterfront commission testimony every day during the hearing.Karl Malden's character, Father Barry, was based on the real-life "waterfront priest" Father John M. Corridan, S.J., a Jesuit priest, graduate of Regis High School who operated a Roman Catholic labor school on the west side of Manhattan. Father Corridan was extensively interviewed by Budd Schulberg, who wrote the foreword to a biography of Father Corridan, Waterfront Priest by Allen Raymond. The church used for the exterior scenes in the film was the historic Our Lady of Grace in Hoboken, built in 1874, while the interiors were shot at the Church of St. Peter and St. Paul, also in Hoboken, at 400 Hudson Street.[1]The film is widely considered to be Kazan's answer to those who criticized him for identifying eight (former) Communists in the film industry before the House Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC) in 1952. Kazan's critics included his friend and collaborator, the noted playwright Arthur Miller, who had written the original screenplay  titled The Hook  for the film that would become On the Waterfront. Miller was replaced by Budd Schulberg, also a witness before HUAC.[2]Budd Schulberg later published a novel simply titled Waterfront that was much closer to his original screenplay than the version that was released on-screen. Among several differences is that Terry Malloy is brutally murdered.Upon its release, the film received rave reviews from critics. On the critics' website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a 100% "Certified Fresh" rating, based on 50 reviews.[3] In 1989, this film was deemed "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. Film critic Roger Ebert lauded the film, stating that Brando and Kazan changed acting in American movies forever and then adding it to his "Great Movies" list. The New York Times critic A. H. Weiler also hailed the film as a masterpiece, calling it "an uncommon powerful, exciting, and imaginative use of the screen by gifted professionals."It is also on the Vatican's list of 45 greatest films of all time, compiled in 1995.[4]The film earned an estimated $4.2 million in rentals at the North American box office in 1954.[5]Academy Awards

On the Waterfront was nominated for twelve Academy Awards, and won eight of them.[6]After Marlon Brando won the Academy Award for Best Actor, it was stolen and did not turn up until much later when a London auction house contacted the actor and informed him of its whereabouts. Before that he had been using it to help hold his front door open.American Film Institute recognitionThe latest version was released in 2001. Among the special features is the featurette "Contender: Mastering the Method," a video photo gallery, an interview with Elia Kazan, an audio commentary, filmographies, production notes, and theatrical trailers.NotesBibliography1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Political context

3.1 Political context4 Reception5 Awards and honors6 DVD release7 References8 External links3.1 Political contextMarlon Brando as Terry MalloyEva Marie Saint as Edie DoyleLee J. Cobb as Johnny FriendlyKarl Malden as Father BarryRod Steiger as Charley MalloyPat Henning as Kayo DuganBen Wagner as Joey DoyleFred Gwynne as Slim (uncredited)Martin Balsam as Gillette (uncredited)Pat Hingle as Bartender (uncredited)AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  #8AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Terry Malloy  #23 Hero
Johnny Friendly  Nominated Villain

Terry Malloy  #23 HeroJohnny Friendly  Nominated VillainAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"You don't understand! I coulda had class. I coulda been a contender. I coulda been somebody instead of a bum, which is what I am."  #3

"You don't understand! I coulda had class. I coulda been a contender. I coulda been somebody instead of a bum, which is what I am."  #3AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  #22AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers  #36AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #19AFI's 10 Top 10  Nominated Gangster filmTerry Malloy  #23 HeroJohnny Friendly  Nominated Villain"You don't understand! I coulda had class. I coulda been a contender. I coulda been somebody instead of a bum, which is what I am."  #3Raymond, Allen, Waterfront Priest (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 1955); forward by On the Waterfront screenwriter Budd SchulbergOn the Waterfront at the Internet Movie DatabaseOn the Waterfront at the TCM Movie DatabaseOn the Waterfront at AllRoviOn the Waterfront at Rotten TomatoesLiteraturefilmsite.orgBibliography of articles and books about On the Waterfront via UC Berkeley Media Resources CenterThe Priest Who Made Budd Schulberg Run: On the Waterfront and Jesuit Social Action, Inside Fordham Online, May 2003Schindler's List is a 1993 epic drama film directed and co-produced by Steven Spielberg and scripted by Steven Zaillian. It is based on the novel Schindler's Ark by Thomas Keneally, an Australian novelist. The film tells the story of Oskar Schindler, a German businessman who saved the lives of more than a thousand mostly Polish-Jewish refugees during the Holocaust by employing them in his factories. It stars Liam Neeson as Schindler, Ralph Fiennes as Schutzstaffel (SS)-officer Amon Gth, and Ben Kingsley as Schindler's Jewish accountant Itzhak Stern. John Williams composed the score.Ideas for a film about the Schindlerjuden were proposed as early as 1963. Poldek Pfefferberg, one of the Schindlerjuden, made it his life's mission to tell the story of Schindler. When executive Sid Sheinberg sent a review of Schindler's Ark to Spielberg, the director was fascinated by the book. He eventually expressed enough interest for Universal Pictures to buy the rights to the novel. However, he was unsure about his own maturity about making a film about the Holocaust. Spielberg tried to pass on the projects to several other directors before finally deciding to direct the film himself after hearing of the various Holocaust denials.Filming took place in Poland over the course of 72 days, in Krakw. Spielberg shot the film like a documentary, and decided not to use storyboards while shooting Schindler's List. Cinematographer Janusz Kamiski wanted to give a timeless sense to the film. Production designer Allan Starski made the sets darker or lighter than the people in the scenes, so they would not blend. The costumes had to be distinguished from skin tones or colors being used for the sets. In composing the score to Schindler's List, Williams hired violinist Itzhak Perlman to perform the film's main theme.Schindler's List premiered on November 30, 1993 in Washington, D.C. and it was released on December 15, 1993 in the United States. The film was a box office success and recipient of seven Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Original Score, as well as numerous other awards (seven BAFTAs, three Golden Globes). In 2007, the American Film Institute ranked the film 8th on its list of the 100 best American films of all time (up one position from its 9th place listing on the 1998 list).In 1939, the Germans relocate Polish Jews to the Krakw Ghetto as World War II begins. Oskar Schindler (Liam Neeson), an ethnic German businessman from Moravia, arrives in the city hoping to make a fortune as a war profiteer. Schindler, a member of the Nazi Party, lavishes bribes upon Wehrmacht and SS officials. Sponsored by the military, Schindler acquires a factory for the production of army mess kits. Not knowing much about how to run such an enterprise, he gains a collaborator in Itzhak Stern (Ben Kingsley), an official of Krakow's Judenrat (Jewish Council) who has contacts with the Jewish business community and the black marketers inside the Ghetto. The Jewish businessmen lend Schindler money in return for a share of products produced. Opening the factory, Schindler pleases the Nazis and enjoys newfound wealth and status as "Herr Direktor", while Stern handles administration. Schindler hires Jewish Poles instead of Catholic Poles because they cost less. Workers in Schindler's factory are allowed outside the ghetto, and Stern ensures that as many people as possible are deemed "essential" to the German war effort, saving them from being transported to concentration camps or killed.SS-Lieutenant (Untersturmfhrer) Amon Goeth (Ralph Fiennes) arrives in Krakw to oversee construction of the Paszw concentration camp. Once the camp is completed, he orders the liquidation of the ghetto and Operation Reinhard in Krakw begins, with hundreds of troops emptying the cramped rooms and arbitrarily murdering anyone who is uncooperative, elderly or infirm. Schindler watches the massacre and is profoundly affected. He nevertheless is careful to befriend Goeth and, through Stern's attention to bribery, Schindler continues enjoying SS support. Schindler bribes Goeth into allowing him to build a sub-camp for his workers, so that he can keep his factory running smoothly and protect them. As time passes, Schindler tries to save as many lives as he can. As the war shifts, Goeth is ordered to ship the remaining Jews to the Auschwitz concentration camp.Schindler prepares to leave Krakw with his fortune. He finds himself unable to do so, however, and prevails upon Goeth to allow him to keep his workers so he can move them to a factory in his old home of Zwittau-Brinnlitz, away from the Final Solution. Goeth charges a massive bribe for each worker. Schindler and Stern assemble a list of workers to be kept off the trains to Auschwitz."Schindler's List" comprises these "skilled" inmates, and for many of those in Paszw, being included means the difference between life and death. Almost all of the people on Schindler's list arrive safely at the new site. The train carrying the women is accidentally redirected to Auschwitz. Schindler bribes the camp commander, Rudolf H, with a cache of diamonds in exchange for releasing the women to Brinnlitz. Once the women arrive, Schindler institutes firm controls on the SS guards assigned to the factory, forbidding them to enter the production areas. He encourages the Jews to observe the Sabbath. To keep his workers alive, he spends much of his fortune bribing Nazi officials and buying shells from other companies; he never produces working shells during the seven months his factory operates. He runs out of money just as the Wehrmacht surrenders, ending the war in Europe.As a Nazi Party member and a self-described "profiteer of slave labour", in 1945, Schindler must flee the advancing Red Army. Although the SS guards have been ordered to kill the Jews, Schindler persuades them to return to their families as men, not murderers. In the aftermath, he packs a car in the night and bids farewell to his workers. They give him a letter explaining he is not a criminal to them, together with a ring secretly made from a worker's gold dental bridge and engraved with a Talmudic quotation, "Whoever saves one life saves the world entire". Schindler is touched but deeply ashamed as he leaves, feeling he could have done more to save lives, such as selling his car and Golden Party Badge.The Schindler Jews are awakened by sunlight the next morning. A Soviet dragoon announces that they have been liberated by the Red Army. The Jews walk to a nearby town in search of food.After a few scenes depicting post-war events such as the execution of Amon Goeth and a summary of what happened to Schindler in his later years, the Jews are shown walking to the nearby town. The black-and-white frame changes to one in color of present-day Schindler Jews at Schindler's grave site in Jerusalem, where he wanted to be interred.[2] A procession of now-elderly Jews who worked in Schindler's factory set stones on his gravea traditional Jewish custom denoting gratitude to the deceased. The actors portraying the major characters walk with them. Ben Kingsley is accompanied by the widow of Itzhak Stern, who died in 1969. A title card reveals that at the time of the film's release, there were fewer than 4,000 Jews left alive in Poland, but more than 6,000 descendants of the Schindler Jews throughout the world. In the final scene, Liam Neeson places a pair of roses on the grave and stands over it.Poldek Pfefferberg was one of the Schindlerjuden, and made it his life's mission to tell the story of his savior. Pfefferberg attempted to produce a biopic of Oskar Schindler with MGM in 1963,[3] with Howard Koch writing,[4] but the deal fell through. In 1982, Thomas Keneally published Schindler's Ark, which he wrote after he met Pfefferberg. MCA president Sid Sheinberg sent director Steven Spielberg a New York Times review of the book. Spielberg was astounded by the story of Oskar Schindler, jokingly asking if it was true. Spielberg "was drawn to the paradoxical nature of [Schindler]... It was about a Nazi saving Jews... What would drive a man like this to suddenly take everything he had earned and put it all in the service of saving these lives?" Spielberg expressed enough interest for Universal Pictures to buy the rights to the novel, and in early 1983 Spielberg met with Pfefferberg. Pfefferberg asked Spielberg, "Please, when are you starting?" Spielberg replied, "Ten years from now."[3] (In the end credits of the film, Pfefferberg is credited as an adviser, under the name "Leopold Page.")Spielberg was unsure of his own maturity in making a film about the Holocaust, and the project remained "on [his] guilty conscience". Spielberg tried to pass the project to director Roman Polanski, who turned it down. Polanski's mother was killed at Auschwitz,[5] and he had lived in and survived the Krakw Ghetto. Polanski eventually directed his own Holocaust drama, The Pianist, in 2002. Spielberg also offered the film to Sydney Pollack,[4] and Martin Scorsese, who was attached to direct Schindler's List in 1988. However, Spielberg was unsure of letting Scorsese direct the film, as "I'd given away a chance to do something for my children and family about the Holocaust." Spielberg offered him the chance to direct the 1991 remake of Cape Fear instead.[4] Billy Wilder expressed interest in directing the film "as a memorial to most of [his] family, who went to Auschwitz."Spielberg finally decided to direct the film after hearing of the various Holocaust deniers.[3] With the rise of neo-Nazism after the fall of the Berlin Wall, he worried that people were too accepting of intolerance, as they were in the 1930s. In addition, Spielberg was becoming more involved with his Jewish heritage while raising his children.[6] Sid Sheinberg greenlit the film on one condition: that Spielberg make Jurassic Park first. Spielberg later said, "He knew that once I had directed Schindler I wouldn't be able to do Jurassic Park."[4]In 1983, Thomas Keneally was hired to adapt his book, and he turned in a 220-page script. Keneally focused on Schindler's numerous relationships, and admitted he did not compress the story enough. Spielberg hired Kurt Luedtke, who had adapted the screenplay of Out of Africa, to write the next draft. Luedtke gave up almost four years later, as he found Schindler's change of heart too unbelievable. During his time as director, Scorsese hired Steven Zaillian to write the script. When he was handed back the project, Spielberg found Zaillian's 115-page draft too short, and asked him to extend it to 195 pages. Spielberg wanted to focus on the Jews in the story. He extended the ghetto liquidation sequence, as he "felt very strongly that the sequence had to be almost unwatchable." He wanted Schindler's transition to be gradual and ambiguous, and not "some kind of explosive catharsis that would turn this into The Great Escape."[4]Liam Neeson auditioned as Oskar Schindler early in the casting process and was cast in December 1992, after Spielberg saw him perform in Anna Christie on Broadway.[4] Warren Beatty participated in a script reading, but Spielberg was concerned that he could not disguise his accent and that he would bring "movie star baggage".[7] Kevin Costner and Mel Gibson expressed interest in portraying Schindler.[4] Neeson felt "[Schindler] enjoyed fookin' [sic] with the Nazis. In Keneally's book it says he was regarded as a kind of a buffoon by them... if the Nazis were New Yorkers, he was from Arkansas. They don't quite take him seriously, and he used that to full effect."[8] To prepare for the role, Neeson was sent tapes of Time Warner CEO Steve Ross, who had a charisma that Spielberg compared to Schindler's.[9]Ralph Fiennes was cast as Amon Goeth after Spielberg viewed his performances in A Dangerous Man: Lawrence After Arabia and Emily Bront's Wuthering Heights. Spielberg said of Fiennes' audition that "I saw sexual evil. It is all about subtlety: there were moments of kindness that would move across his eyes and then instantly run cold." Fiennes put on 28lbs to play the role. He watched historic newsreels and talked to Holocaust survivors who knew Amon Gth. In portraying him, Fiennes said "I got close to his pain. Inside him is a fractured, miserable human being. I feel split about him, sorry for him. He's like some dirty, battered doll I was given and that I came to feel peculiarly attached to." Fiennes looked so much like Amon Gth in costume that when Mila Pfefferberg, a survivor of the events, met him she trembled with fear.[10]Overall, there are 126 speaking parts in the film. Thirty thousand extras were hired during filming. Spielberg cast children of the Schindlerjuden for key Hebrew-speaking roles and hired Catholic Poles for the survivors.[4] Often, German actors playing the SS would come to Spielberg and say, "Thank you for letting me resolve my [family] secrets by playing in your movie."[7] Halfway during the shoot, Spielberg conceived the epilogue where 128 Schindlerjuden pay their respects to Schindler's grave in Jerusalem. The producers scrambled to find the people portrayed in the film.[4]Shooting for Schindler's List began on March 1, 1993 in Krakw (Cracow), Poland, and continued for seventy-one days.[3] The crew shot at the real life locations, though the Paszw camp had to be reconstructed in a pit adjacent to the original site, due to post-war changes to the original camp. The crew was forbidden to enter Auschwitz, so they shot at a replica outside the camp.[9] The Polish locals welcomed the filmmakers. There were some antisemitic incidents; anti-Semitic symbols scrawled on local billboards near shooting locations.[4] An elderly woman mistook Fiennes for a Nazi and told him "the Germans were charming people. They didn't kill anybody who didn't deserve it",[10] while Kingsley nearly entered a brawl with an elderly German-speaking businessman who insulted Israeli actor Michael Schneider.[11] Nonetheless, Spielberg stated that at Passover, "all the German actors showed up. They put on yarmulkes and opened up Haggadas, and the Israeli actors moved right next to them and began explaining it to them. And this family of actors sat around and race and culture were just left behind."[11]"I was hit in the face with my personal life. My upbringing. My Jewishness. The stories my grandparents told me about the Shoah. And Jewish life came pouring back into my heart. I cried all the time."Shooting Schindler's List was deeply emotional for Spielberg, the subject matter forcing him to confront elements of his childhood, such as the antisemitism he faced. He was furious with himself when he did not "cry buckets" while visiting Auschwitz, and was one of many crew members who did not look on during shooting of the scene where aging Jews are forced to run naked while being selected by Nazi doctors to go to Auschwitz.[9] Several actresses broke down when filming the shower scene, including one who was born in a concentration camp.[7] Kate Capshaw and Spielberg's five children accompanied Spielberg on set, and he later thanked his wife "for rescuing me ninety-two days in a row...when things just got too unbearable." Spielberg's parents and his rabbi visited him on set. Robin Williams called Spielberg every two weeks to cheer him up with various jokes,[3] because there was very little humor on set. Spielberg also ordered various episodes of Seinfeld on VHS to watch in his hotel room after shooting each day.[7] Coincidentally, Jerry Seinfeld's watching of Schindler's List in a theater became the plot of a later Seinfeld episode. Spielberg forewent a salary for the film, calling it "blood money", and believed the film would flop.[3]Spielberg used German and Polish language in scenes to recreate the feeling of being present in the past, and used English to emphasize dramatic points. The director was interested in making the film entirely in German and Polish, but decided "there's too much safety in reading. It would have been an excuse to take their eyes off the screen and watch something else."[7]Spielberg decided not to plan the film with storyboards, and to shoot the film like a documentary, looking to the documentaries The Twisted Cross (1956)[12] and Shoah (1985) for inspiration. Forty percent of the film was shot with handheld cameras,[13] and the modest budget of $25 million meant the film was shot quickly over seventy-two days. Spielberg felt that this gave the film "a spontaneity, an edge, and it also serves the subject." Spielberg said that he "got rid of the crane, got rid of the Steadicam, got rid of the zoom lenses, [and] got rid of everything that for me might be considered a safety net."[9] Such a style made Spielberg feel like an artist, as he limited his tools for a film he felt didn't have to be commercially successful.[6] This matured Spielberg, who felt that in the past he had always been paying tribute to directors such as Cecil B. DeMille or David Lean.[11] On this film, his shooting style was purely his own. He proudly noted that in this film, there were no crane shots.[4]The decision to shoot the film mainly in black and white lent to the documentary-style of cinematography, which cinematographer Janusz Kamiski compared to German Expressionism and Italian neorealism.[9] Kamiski said that he wanted to give a timeless sense to the film, so the audience would "not have a sense of when it was made."[9] Spielberg was following suit with "[v]irtually everything I've seen on the Holocaust... which have largely been stark, black and white images."[14] Universal chairman Tom Pollock asked Spielberg to shoot the film in a color negative, to allow color VHS copies of the film to be sold, but Spielberg did not want "to beautify events."[9] Black and white did present challenges to the color-familiar crew. Allan Starski, the production designer, had to make the sets darker or lighter than the people in the scenes, so they would not blend. The costumes had to be distinguished from skin tones or colors being used for the sets.[14]John Williams composed the score for Schindler's List. The composer was amazed by the film, and felt it would be too challenging. He said to Spielberg, "You need a better composer than I am for this film." Spielberg responded, "I know. But they're all dead!"[15] Williams played the main theme on piano, and following Spielberg's suggestion, he hired Itzhak Perlman to perform it on the violin.In an interview with Perlman on Schindler's List, he said: "I couldn't believe how authentic he [John Williams] got everything to sound, and I said, 'John, where did it come from?' and he said, 'Well I had some practice with Fiddler on the Roof and so on, and everything just came very naturally' and that's the way it sounds."Interviewer: "When you were first approached to play for Schindler's List, did you give it a second thought, did you agree at once, or did you say 'I'm not sure I want to play for movie music'?Perlman: "No, that never occurred to me, because in that particular case the subject of the movie was so important to me, and I felt that I could contribute simply by just knowing the history, and feeling the history, and indirectly actually being a victim of that history."[16]In the scene where the ghetto is being liquidated by the Nazis, the folk song Oyfn Pripetshik (or Afn Pripetshek) (Yiddish:  )" is sung by a children's choir. The song was often sung by Spielberg's grandmother, Becky, to her grandchildren.[17] The clarinet solos heard in the film were recorded by Klezmer virtuoso Giora Feidman. Williams won an Academy Award for Best Original Score for Schindler's List, his fifth win.While the film is shot primarily in black-and-white, red is used to distinguish a little girl in a coat (portrayed by Oliwia Dabrowska). Later in the film, the girl appears to be one of the dead Jewish people, recognizable only by the red coat she is still wearing. Although it was unintentional, this character is coincidentally very similar to Roma Ligocka, who was known in the Krakw Ghetto for her red coat. Ligocka, unlike her fictional counterpart, survived the Holocaust. After the film was released, she wrote and published her own story, The Girl in the Red Coat: A Memoir (2002, in translation).[18] The scene, however, was constructed on the memories of Zelig Burkhut, survivor of Plaszow (and other work camps). When interviewed by Spielberg before the film was made, Burkhut told of a young girl wearing a pink coat, no older than four, who was shot by a Nazi officer right before his eyes. When being interviewed by The Courier-Mail, he said "it is something that stays with you forever."According to Andy Patrizio of IGN, the girl in the red coat is used to indicate that Schindler has changed: "Spielberg put a twist on her [Ligocka's] story, turning her into one more pile on the cart of corpses to be incinerated. The look on Schindler's face is unmistakable. Minutes earlier, he saw the ash and soot of burning corpses piling up on his car as just an annoyance."[19] Andre Caron wondered whether it was done "to symbolize innocence, hope or the red blood of the Jewish people being sacrificed in the horror of the Holocaust?"[20] Spielberg himself has explained that he only followed the novel, and his interpretation was thatAlthough she has no speaking part, the little girl is noted on the Internet Movie Database as the "Red Genia". Her portrayer, Oliwia Dabrowska, was born in Krakow on 28 May 1989 and later appeared in only one other movie.The beginning features a family observing the Shabbat. Spielberg said, "to start the film with the candles being lit...would be a rich bookend, to start the film with a normal Shabbat service before the juggernaut against the Jews begins." When the color fades out in the film's opening moments, it gives way to a movie in which smoke comes to symbolize bodies being burnt at Auschwitz. Only at the end do the images of candle fire regain their warmth when Schindler allows his workers to hold Shabbat services. For Spielberg, they represented "just a glint of color, and a glimmer of hope."[4]The film opened in New York, Los Angeles, and Toronto on December 15, 1993. The film grossed $96.1 million in the United States and over $321.2 million worldwide.[22] In Germany, over 5.8 million admission tickets were sold.Schindler's List made its US network television premiere on NBC in February 1997. The film was shown without commercials, and fully sponsored by Ford Motor Company. It gained the highest Nielsen rating (to that date) for any movie since NBC's broadcast of Jurassic Park (also directed by Spielberg) in May 1995.[23] (For further information on the telecast, see the "Controversies" section below.)The film was released to DVD on March 9, 2004. The DVD was available in widescreen and fullscreen editions, both being a double-sided disc with the feature film beginning on side A and continuing on side B, along with the special features, which include a documentary introduced by Steven Spielberg. Also released for both formats was a limited edition gift set. The laserdisc gift set was a limited one, with only 10,000 copies manufactured. Besides the DVD, the set included the film's soundtrack, the original novel, and an exclusive photo booklet.[24] Similar to the Laserdisc set, the DVD gift set included the widescreen version of the film, the original novel, the film's soundtrack on CD, a senitype, and a photo booklet titled Schindler's List: Images of the Steven Spielberg Film, all housed in a plexiglass case.[25] The set has since been discontinued.[26]The film will be released on Blu-ray Disc in 2013 as part of Universal's 100th Anniversary celebration. No specific date has been announced as of yet.[27]The film is aired on public television in Israel every year on Holocaust Memorial Day, unedited, uncensored and without commercial breaks.[citation needed]Following the success of the film, Spielberg founded the Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation, a non-profit organization with the goal of providing an archive for the filmed testimony of as many survivors of the Holocaust as possible, to save their stories. He continues to finance that work.[22] Spielberg used the money from the film to finance several related documentaries, including The Lost Children of Berlin (1996), Anne Frank Remembered (1995), and The Last Days (1998).[22]Schindler's List received widespread acclaim from critics. Reviewing Schindlers List for The New York Review of Books, the leading British critic John Gross wrote: Suppose the Disney organization announced that it was planning a film about the Holocaust. Spielbergs films up until now have mostly been fairy tales or adventure stories, or a mixture of both, so I cant pretend, then, that I approached the film without apprehension. My fears were altogether misplaced. Spielberg shows a firm moral and emotional grasp of his material. The film is an outstanding achievement.[28] However, film critic Robert Philip Kolker, in his book A Cinema of Loneliness, attacked the film's portrayal of Goeth as "too unrelievedly brutal. He is a psychopath, and psychopathology is too easy a way to dismiss Nazism and its adherents. [...] Ideological elements are so distorted by dreams of power, authority, and manufactured hatred and convictions of necessity, that the majority of a culture gets caught up in the act of killing the demonized other. There were psychotic Germans, to be sure; but Nazism cannot be reduced simply to psychosis. There are scenes in Schindler's List of German officers in a hysterical frenzy of killing that are, perhaps, more accurate than Goeth's unrelenting murderousness, but also bring with them the old Hollywood representations of Nazis as sophisticated gangsters."[29]Schindler's List was highly received by many of Spielberg's peers. Filmmaker Billy Wilder reportedly wrote a long letter of appreciation to Spielberg in which he proclaimed, "They couldn't have gotten a better man. This movie is absolutely perfection."[30] Roman Polanski, who had turned down Spielberg's offer to direct the film, later commented, "I certainly wouldn't have done as good a job as Spielberg because I couldn't have been as objective as he was." Polanski has also cited Schindler's List as an influence on his 1995 film Death and the Maiden.[31] The success of Schindler's List persuaded filmmaker Stanley Kubrick to abandon his own Holocaust project, Aryan Papers, which would have been about a Jewish boy who survives the war, along with his aunt, by sneaking through Poland while pretending to be a Catholic.[32] Convinced that no film could truly capture the horror of the Holocaust, scriptwriter Frederic Raphael has recalled that Kubrick commented on Schindler's List, "Think that's about the Holocaust? That was about success, wasn't it? The Holocaust is about 6 million people who get killed. Schindler's List is about 600 who don't."[32]French New Wave filmmaker, Jean-Luc Godard, accused Spielberg of using the film to make a profit of tragedy while Schindler's wife, Emilie Schindler, lived in poverty in Argentina.[33] In defense of Spielberg, critic Roger Ebert said, "Has Godard or any other director living or dead done more than Spielberg, with his Holocaust Project, to honor and preserve the memories of the survivors?"[34] Author Thomas Keneally has also disputed claims that Emilie Schindler was never paid for her contributions to the film, "not least because I had recently sent Emilie a check myself."[35] Filmmaker Michael Haneke also criticized the sequence in the film in which Schindler's women are accidentally sent off to Auschwitz and hurdled into showers: "There's a scene in that film when we don't know if there's gas or water coming out in the showers in the camp. You can only do something like that with a naive audience like in the United States. It's not an appropriate use of the form. Spielberg meant well  but it was dumb."[36] However, according to one of Schindler's women, Etka Liebgold, this incident is based on fact.[37]The film was attacked by filmmaker and professor Claude Lanzmann, director of the 9-hour Holocaust documentary Shoah, who called Schindler's List a "kitschy melodrama", and a "deformation" of historical truth. Lanzmann was especially critical of Spielberg for viewing the Holocaust through the eyes of a German. Believing his own film to be the definitive account of the Holocaust, Lanzmann complained, "I sincerely thought that there was a time before Shoah, and a time after Shoah, and that after Shoah certain things could no longer be done. Spielberg did them anyway."[38] Spielberg angrily responded to Lanzmann's criticisms, accusing him of wanting to be "the only voice in the definite account of the Holocaust." He added, "It amazed me that there could be any hurt feelings in an effort to reflect the truth."[39] Hungarian Jewish author Imre Kertsz, a Holocaust survivor, also criticized Spielberg for falsifying the experience of the Holocaust in Schindler's List and for showing it as something that is foreign to the human nature and impossible to recur. He also dismissed the film itself, saying "it is obvious that the American Spielberg, who incidentally wasn't even born until after the war, has and can have no idea of the authentic reality of a Nazi concentration camp... I regard as kitsch any representation of the Holocaust that is incapable of understanding or unwilling to understand the organic connection between our own deformed mode of life (whether in the private sphere or on the level of "civilization" as such) and the very possibility of the Holocaust."[40]In 2004, the Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.[41] Schindler's List featured on a number of other "best of" lists, including the Time magazine's Top Hundred as selected by critics Richard Corliss and Richard Schickel, Time Out magazine's 100 Greatest Films Centenary Poll conducted in 1995, Roger Ebert's "Great Movies" series, and Leonard Maltin's "100 Must See Movies of the Century". In addition, the Vatican named Schindler's List among the top 45 films ever made.[42] The readers of the German film magazine, Cinema, voted Schindler's List the #1 best movie of all time in 2000.[43] In 2002, a Channel 4 poll named Schindler's List the ninth greatest film of all time,[44] and it ranked fourth in the 2005 war films poll.[45]Schindler's List won seven Oscars at the 66th Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director. It was the first black and white film since The Apartment to win the Oscar for Best Picture. Liam Neeson and Ralph Fiennes were nominated for Best Actor and Best Supporting Actor respectively, but did not win.[46] At the British Academy awards, the film won Best Film, the David Lean Award for Direction, Best Supporting Actor (Ralph Fiennes), Cinematography, Editing and Score.[22] Schindler's List won Golden Globes for Best Motion Picture (Drama), Best Director and Best Screenplay, with John Williams awarded the Grammy for the film's musical score.[22]According to Slovak filmmaker Juraj Herz, the scene in which a group of women confuse an actual shower with a gas chamber is taken directly, shot by shot, from his Zastihla m noc (Night Caught Up with Me, 1986). Herz says he wanted to sue, but was unable to come up with the money to fund the effort.[50]For the 1997 American television showing of the film, at Spielberg's insistence it aired unedited and nearly uncensored, although the sex scene was mildly edited by removing nearly all of the "thrusting". The film was preceded by a recorded introduction by Spielberg himself, explaining why the film was being aired nearly unedited. The telecast was the first ever to receive a TV-M (now TV-MA) rating under the TV Parental Guidelines that had been established at the beginning of that year.[citation needed] Senator Tom Coburn, then an Oklahoma congressman, said that in airing the film, NBC had brought television "to an all-time low, with full-frontal nudity, violence and profanity", adding that airing the film was an insult to "decent-minded individuals everywhere".[51] Under fire from fellow Republicans as well as from Democrats, Coburn apologized for his criticism, saying: "My intentions were good, but I've obviously made an error in judgment in how I've gone about saying what I wanted to say." He said he hadn't reversed his opinion on airing the film, but said it ought to have been aired later at night when there aren't "large numbers of children watching without parental supervision".[52] The film was subsequently rebroadcast a year later on select PBS stations, once again airing unedited and without Spielberg's prologue.Controversy arose in Germany for the film's television premiere on Pro 7. Heavy protests ensued after the station intended to televise the film separated by two commercial breaks. As a compromise, the broadcast finally included one break, consisting of a short news update and selected commercials (no alcohol and no hygiene products).[why?][53] Since then, subsequent broadcasts in German television did not include commercial breaks.In the Philippines chief censor Henrietta Mendez ordered three cuts of Schindler's List, due to its scenes that displayed female nudity and sexual intercourse, before it could be shown. As a result of these proposed cuts Steven Spielberg pulled the film from screening in the Philippines. As a result of Mendez's actions, Philippine senators demanded the abolition of the Philippine censors board. Senate justice committee chairman Raul Roco stated "such narrow-mindedness precisely shows the dangers of censorship." Mendez argued that "the sex act is sacred and beautiful and should be done in the privacy of the bedroom."[54]The song "Yerushalayim Shel Zahav" ("Jerusalem of Gold") is featured in the film's soundtrack and plays during a key moment near the end of the film. This caused some controversy in Israel when the film was released because the song was written in 1967 and is widely known in Israel as a popfolk song. The song was therefore edited out of the Israeli release of the film and replaced by the song "Eli, Eli", which was written by the Jewish Hungarian poet Hannah Szenes in World War II and is more appropriate for the time period and subject matter of the film.November 30, 1993(1993-11-30) (Washington, D.C.)December 15, 1993(1993-12-15) (United States)1 Plot2 Cast

2.1 Main
2.2 Secondary

2.1 Main2.2 Secondary3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Casting
3.3 Filming
3.4 Cinematography
3.5 Music

3.1 Development3.2 Casting3.3 Filming3.4 Cinematography3.5 Music4 Symbols

4.1 The girl in the red coat
4.2 Candles

4.1 The girl in the red coat4.2 Candles5 Release6 Reception7 Awards

7.1 Academy Award
7.2 Golden Globe Award

7.2.1 Won
7.2.2 Nominated


7.3 American Film Institute recognition

7.1 Academy Award7.2 Golden Globe Award

7.2.1 Won
7.2.2 Nominated

7.2.1 Won7.2.2 Nominated7.3 American Film Institute recognition8 Controversies9 See also10 References11 External links2.1 Main2.2 Secondary3.1 Development3.2 Casting3.3 Filming3.4 Cinematography3.5 Music4.1 The girl in the red coat4.2 Candles7.1 Academy Award7.2 Golden Globe Award

7.2.1 Won
7.2.2 Nominated

7.2.1 Won7.2.2 Nominated7.3 American Film Institute recognition7.2.1 Won7.2.2 NominatedLiam Neeson as Oskar Schindler, a German Nazi businessman who saves the lives of over 1,100 Jews by employing them in his factory.Ben Kingsley as Itzhak Stern, Schindler's accountant and business partner.Ralph Fiennes as Amon Gth, an SS officer assigned to build and run the Paszw concentration camp, and is befriended by Schindler, though he grows steadily suspicious of Schindler's true aims as the film progresses. He is sadistic and psychopathic, frequently murdering his prisoners for fun.Embeth Davidtz as Helen Hirsch, a young Jewish woman whom Goeth takes to work as his housekeeper, and finds attractive.Caroline Goodall as Emilie Schindler, Schindler's wife.Jonathan Sagall as Poldek Pfefferberg, a young man who survives with his wife, and provides goods to Schindler from the black market.Ezra Dagan as Rabbi Lewartow, a rabbi who acquires skills as a welder in Schindler's camp.Malgoscha Gebel as Wiktoria Klonowska, Schindler's mistress.Shmuel Levy as Wilek Chilowicz.Mark Ivanir as Marcel Goldberg.Batrice Macola as Ingrid.Andrzej Seweryn as Julian Scherner.Friedrich von Thun as Rolf Czurda.Krzysztof Luft as Herman Toffel.Harry Nehring as Leo John.Norbert Weisser as Albert Hujar.Adi Nitzan as Mila Pfefferberg, Poldek Pfefferberg's wife.Michael Schneider as Juda Dresner.Miri Fabian as Chaja Dresner.Anna Mucha as Danka Dresner.Ben Darby as Man in grey.Albert Misak as Mordecai Wulkan.Hans-Michael Rehberg as Rudolf Hss.Daniel Del Ponte as Dr. Josef Mengele.Best Motion Picture  DramaBest DirectorBest ScreenplayBest ScoreBest Supporting Actor  Motion PictureBest Actor  Motion Picture Drama1998 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies#9[48]2003 AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Oskar Schindler#13 Hero
Amon Gth#15 Villain

Oskar Schindler#13 HeroAmon Gth#15 VillainAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"The list is an absolute good. The list is life."  Nominated[49]

"The list is an absolute good. The list is life."  Nominated[49]2006 AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers#32007 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)#82008 AFI's 10 Top 10#3 Epic filmOskar Schindler#13 HeroAmon Gth#15 Villain"The list is an absolute good. The list is life."  Nominated[49]List of films considered the bestSchindler's ArkAristides de Sousa MendesSchindler's List at the Internet Movie DatabaseSchindler's List at Rotten TomatoesSchindler's List at MetacriticSchindler's List at the TCM Movie DatabaseSchindler's List at AllRoviThe Shoah Foundation, founded by Steven Spielberg to videotape and preserve the testimonies of Holocaust survivors and witnesses.Aerial Evidence for Schindlers ListThrough the Lens of HistoryYad VashemSchindler's List (film) bibliography via UC BerkeleyVoices on Antisemitism Interview with Ralph Fiennes from the U.S. Holocaust Memorial MuseumVoices on Antisemitism Interview with Sir Ben Kingsley from the U.S. Holocaust Memorial MuseumSchindler's List: Myth, movie, and memory, The Village Voice; Mar 29, 1994Singin' in the Rain is a 1952 American musical comedy film starring Gene Kelly, Donald O'Connor and Debbie Reynolds and directed by Gene Kelly and Stanley Donen, with Kelly also providing the choreography. It offers a lighthearted depiction of Hollywood, with the three stars portraying performers caught up in the transition from silent films to "talkies."The film was only a modest hit when first released, with O'Connor's Best Actor win at the Golden Globes and Comden and Green's win at the Writers Guild of America Awards being the only major recognitions. However, it was accorded its legendary status by contemporary critics. It is now frequently described as one of the best musicals ever made,[2] topping the AFI's 100 Years of Musicals list, and ranking fifth in its updated list of the greatest American films in 2007.Don Lockwood (Gene Kelly) is a popular silent film star with humble roots as a singer, dancer and stunt man. Don barely tolerates his vapid, shallow leading lady, Lina Lamont (Jean Hagen), though their studio, Monumental Pictures, links them romantically to increase their popularity. Lina herself is convinced they are in love, despite Don's protestations otherwise.At the premiere of his newest film, The Royal Rascal, Don tells the gathered crowd an exaggerated version of his life story. His words are humorously contradicted by flashbacks.One day, to escape from fans, Don jumps into a passing car driven by Kathy Selden (Debbie Reynolds). She drops him off, but not before claiming to be a stage actress and sneering at his undignified accomplishments. Later, at a party, the head of Don's studio, R.F. Simpson (Millard Mitchell), shows a short demonstration of a Vitaphone talking picture[3] but his guests are unimpressed. To Don's amusement and Kathy's embarrassment, she pops out of a mock cake right in front of him as part of the entertainment; Kathy, it turns out, is a chorus girl. Furious at Don's teasing, she throws a real cake at him, only to hit Lina right in the face. Later, after weeks of searching, Don makes up with Kathy after he finds her working in another Monumental Pictures production. She confesses to having been a fan of Don and Lina's all along and they begin to fall in love.After a rival studio has an enormous hit with its first talking picture, 1927's The Jazz Singer, R.F. decides he has no choice but to convert the next Lockwood and Lamont film, The Dueling Cavalier, into a talkie. The production is beset with difficulties. By far, the worst problem is Lina's grating voice. An exasperated diction coach tried to teach her how to speak properly, but to no avail. Meanwhile, Don is also taking diction lessons (albeit with much better results). He makes use of Tongue-twisters while his best friend, Cosmo Brown (Donald O'Connor), makes goofy faces in the background. Afterwards, Don and Cosmo mess up the room while staging a song and dance number ("Moses Supposes His Toeses are Roses") much to the bewilderment of Don's diction coach. The Dueling Cavalier's test screening is a disaster. In one scene, Don repeats the line "I love you" to Lina over and over, to the audience's derisive laughter.[4] Then in the middle of the film, the sound goes out of synchronization, with hilarious results.Cosmo then comes up with the idea to dub Lina's voice with Kathy's, and they persuade R.F. to turn The Dueling Cavalier into a musical called The Dancing Cavalier, complete with a modern musical number called "Broadway Melody". When Lina finds out, she is infuriated and does everything possible to sabotage the romance between Don and Kathy. She becomes even angrier when she discovers that R.F. intends to give Kathy a screen credit and a big publicity promotion. Lina, after consulting lawyers, threatens to sue R.F. unless he cancels Kathy's buildup and orders her to continue working (uncredited) as Lina's voice. R.F. reluctantly agrees to her demands.The premiere of The Dancing Cavalier is a tremendous success. When the audience clamors for Lina to sing live, Don, Cosmo, and R.F. improvise and get her to lip sync into the microphone while Kathy, hidden behind the stage curtain, sings into a second one. While Lina is "singing," Don, Cosmo and R.F. gleefully raise the curtain. When Cosmo replaces Kathy at the microphone, the sham becomes obvious. Lina flees in embarrassment. Kathy tries to run away as well, but Don introduces the audience to "the real star of the film." The final shot shows Kathy and Don kissing in front of a billboard for their new film, Singin' in the Rain.Singin' in the Rain was originally conceived by MGM producer Arthur Freed, the head of the "Freed Unit" responsible for turning out MGM's lavish musicals, as a vehicle for his catalog of songs written with Nacio Herb Brown for previous MGM musical films of the 1929-39 period.[9] Screenwriters Betty Comden and Adolph Green contributed lyrics to one new song.[10]All songs have lyrics by Freed and music by Brown, unless otherwise indicated.[10] Some of the songs, such as "Broadway Rhythm," "Should I?" and most notably "Singin' in the Rain," were featured in numerous films. The films listed below mark the first time each song was presented on screen.In an early draft of the script, the musical number "Singin' in the Rain" was to be sung by Debbie Reynolds, Donald O'Connor, and Gene Kelly on their way back from the flop preview of The Dueling Cavalier. In addition, "You Were Meant For Me" was not included in that draft. Instead, the love song was supposed to be Gene Kelly's version of "All I Do is Dream of You," which would be sung after the party at R.F. Simpson's house, when Kelly chases after Reynolds. The song would have ended up at Kelly's house. The footage of this scene has been lost. Reynolds' solo rendition of "You Are My Lucky Star" (to a billboard showing an image of Lockwood) was cut from the film, but has survived and is included on the original soundtrack and DVD version of the film.[12] Rita Moreno was originally to have sung "I Got a Feelin' You're Foolin'," but this ended up being part of the Beautiful Girl medley.In the famous dance routine in which Gene Kelly sings the title song while twirling an umbrella, splashing through puddles and getting soaked to the skin, Kelly was sick with a 103 F (39C) fever.[13] The rain in the scene caused Kelly's wool suit to shrink during filming. A common myth is that Kelly managed to perform the entire song in one take, thanks to cameras placed at predetermined locations. However this was not the case as the filming of the sequence took place over 23 days.[14] Another myth is that the rain was mixed with milk in order for the drops to show up on camera, but the shots were simply lit from the front.[15]Debbie Reynolds was not a dancer at the time she made Singin' in the Rain; her background was as a gymnast.[12] Kelly apparently insulted her for her lack of dance experience, upsetting her. In a subsequent encounter when Fred Astaire was in the studio, he found Reynolds crying under a piano. Hearing what had happened, Astaire volunteered to help her with her dancing. Kelly later admitted that he had not been kind to Reynolds and was surprised that she was still willing to talk to him afterwards. After shooting the "Good Morning" routine, Reynolds' feet were bleeding.[12] Years later, she was quoted as saying that "Singin' in the Rain and childbirth were the two hardest things I ever had to do in my life."[16]Donald O'Connor had to be hospitalized after filming the "Make 'em Laugh" sequence. He smoked up to four packs of cigarettes a day.[14]Most of the costumes from this film were eventually acquired by Debbie Reynolds and housed in her massive collection of original film costumes, sets and props. Many of these items were sold at a 2011 auction in Hollywood. While most items were sold to private collectors, Donald O'Connor's green check "Fit As a Fiddle" suit and shoes were purchased by Costume World, Inc. and are now on permanent display at the Costume World Broadway Collection Museum in Pompano Beach, Florida.[citation needed]The film earned an estimated $3.6 million in theatrical rentals at the North American box office in 1952, making it the tenth biggest hit of the year.[1][17]For her role as Lina Lamont, Jean Hagen was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. The film was also nominated for a Best Original Music Score.Donald O'Connor won a Golden Globe for this film.[18] Betty Comden and Adolph Green received the Writers Guild of America for the best written American musical.[19]Singin' in the Rain has appeared twice on Sight and Sound's list of the ten best films of all time, in 1982 and 2002. Its position in 1982 was at number 4 on the critics list; on the 2002 critics' list it was listed as number 10 and it tied for 19 on the directors' list.[20] The film has a rare 100% positive reviews on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 45 sources.[21] In 2008, Singin' in the Rain was placed on Empire's 500 Greatest Movies of All Time LIst, ranking at #8, the highest ranked G-rated movie on the list.In 1989, Singin' in the Rain was among the first 25 films chosen for the newly established National Film Registry for films that are deemed "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation.American Film Institute recognitionThe 40th Anniversary Edition VHS version released in 1992 includes a documentary, the original trailer, and Reynolds' solo rendition of "You Are My Lucky Star," which had been cut from the final film.[22]According to the audio commentary on the 2002 Special Edition DVD, the original negative was destroyed in a fire, but despite this, the film has been digitally restored for its DVD release. A Blu-ray edition was released July 2012.1 Plot2 Cast3 Songs4 Missing scenes5 Production6 Reception7 Award and honor8 Home video9 In popular culture10 Notes11 Further reading12 External linksGene Kelly as Don Lockwood. Although his performance in the song "Singin' in the Rain" is now considered iconic, Kelly was not the first choice for the roleHoward Keel was originally cast. However, Keel was replaced by Kelly as the screenwriters evolved the character from a "Western actor" to a "song-and-dance vaudeville" performer.[5]Donald O'Connor as Cosmo Brown. The role was based on, and initially written for, Oscar Levant.Debbie Reynolds as Kathy Selden. Early on in production, Judy Garland (shortly before her contract termination from MGM), Kathryn Grayson, Jane Powell, Leslie Caron, and June Allyson were among the names thrown around for the role of the "ingenue." Yet, Director Stanley Donen and Gene Kelly insisted that Debbie Reynolds always was first in their mind for the role.[6] Although the film revolves around the idea that Kathy has to dub over for Lina's voice, in the talking scenes it was actually Jean Hagen's normal voice. Reynolds herself was dubbed in "Would You?" and "You are My Lucky Star" by an uncredited Betty Noyes.[7] Also, when Kathy is supposedly dubbing Lina's voice in the live performance of "Singing in the Rain" at the end of the film, Jean Hagen is actually dubbing Reynolds' singing voice.[8]Jean Hagen as Lina Lamont. Judy Holliday was strongly considered for the role of Lina, until she suggested Hagen, who had been her understudy in the Broadway production of Born Yesterday. Fresh off her role in The Asphalt Jungle, Hagen read for the part for producer Arthur Freed and did a dead-on impression of Holliday's Billie Dawn character, which won her the role. Her character was based on the silent picture star Norma Talmadge who bombed during the transition to talkies.Millard Mitchell as R.F. Simpson. The initials of the fictional head of Monumental Pictures are a reference to producer Freed. R.F. also uses one of Freed's favorite expressions when he says that he "cannot quite visualize it" and has to see it on film first, referring to the Broadway ballet sequence, a joke, since the audience has just seen it.Cyd Charisse as Gene Kelly's dance partner in the "Broadway Melody" ballet.Douglas Fowley as Roscoe Dexter, the director of Don and Lina's films.Rita Moreno as Zelda Zanders, the "Zip Girl" and Lina's informant friend. Considered to be based on Clara Bow (The It Girl).King Donovan (uncredited) as Rod, head of the publicity department at Monumental Pictures.Judy Landon (uncredited) as Olga Mara, a silent screen vamp who attends the premiere of The Royal Rascal. She is considered to be based on Pola Negri and Gloria Swanson.Madge Blake (uncredited) as Dora Bailey, a radio show host. Considered to be based on Louella Parsons.Kathleen Freeman (uncredited) as Phoebe Dinsmore, Lina's diction coachBobby Watson (uncredited) as diction coach during "Moses Supposes" numberJimmy Thompson (uncredited) as the singer of "Beautiful Girl"Mae Clarke (uncredited) as the hairdresser who puts the finishing touches on Lina Lamont's hairdo."Fit as a Fiddle (And Ready for Love)," from College Coach (1933)[11] (music by Al Hoffman and Al Goodhart)"Temptation" (instrumental only), from Going Hollywood (1933)"All I Do Is Dream of You," from Sadie McKee (1934)[10]"Singin' in the Rain," from Hollywood Revue of 1929 (1929)[10]"Make 'Em Laugh," considered an original song, but bearing close relation to Cole Porter's "Be a Clown", used in another Freed musical, The Pirate (1948)."Beautiful Girl Montage" comprising "I Got a Feelin' You're Foolin'" from Broadway Melody of 1936 (1935),[10] "The Wedding of the Painted Doll" from The Broadway Melody (1929)[10] and "Should I?" from Lord Byron of Broadway (1930)[10]"Beautiful Girl," from Going Hollywood (1933)[11] or from Stage Mother (1933)[10]"You Were Meant for Me," from The Broadway Melody (1929)[10]"You Are My Lucky Star," from Broadway Melody of 1936 (1935)[10]"Moses Supposes" (music by Roger Edens, lyrics by Comden and Green)"Good Morning," from Babes In Arms (1939)[10]"Would You?," from San Francisco (1936)[10]"Broadway Melody Ballet" composed of "The Broadway Melody" from The Broadway Melody (1929)[10] and "Broadway Rhythm" from Broadway Melody of 1936 (1935)[10] (music by Nacio Herb Brown and Lennie Hayton)AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #10AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs - #16AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions - #16AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Lina Lamont - Nominated Villain

Lina Lamont - Nominated VillainAFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs:

"Singin' in the Rain" - #3
"Make 'em Laugh" - #49
"Good Morning" - #72

"Singin' in the Rain" - #3"Make 'em Laugh" - #49"Good Morning" - #72AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"What do they think I am, dumb or something? Why, I make more money than Calvin Coolidge! Put together!" - Nominated

"What do they think I am, dumb or something? Why, I make more money than Calvin Coolidge! Put together!" - NominatedAFI's Greatest Movie Musicals - #1AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #5Lina Lamont - Nominated Villain"Singin' in the Rain" - #3"Make 'em Laugh" - #49"Good Morning" - #72"What do they think I am, dumb or something? Why, I make more money than Calvin Coolidge! Put together!" - NominatedA similar plot had been used in the 1946 French film toile sans lumire (aka "Star without Light"), directed by Marcel Blistne, starring Edith Piaf and Mila Parly and later in the 1959 British film Follow a Star, directed by Robert Asher and starring Norman Wisdom and Jerry Desmonde."Singin' in the Rain" is sung mockingly by Alex DeLarge, played by Malcolm McDowell, in the rape scene in Stanley Kubrick's film A Clockwork Orange (1971).The "Singin' in the Rain" routine has been parodied or imitated numerous times, including by Morecambe and Wise, Paddington Bear, The Wombles and in the animated film Robots (2005). The dance was also parodied, briefly, by The Goodies during their television episode "Saturday Night Grease", where the music for the dance sequence was "Singin' in the Rain". It was also once sung (very badly) by Bill Owen outside Nora Batty's house in an episode of Last of the Summer Wine. In Fame, Coco Hernandez (played by Irene Cara) dances in a puddle on a train station while singing "Singin' in the Rain".World Champion Canadian figure skater Kurt Browning did an on-ice (and water) recreation in a Stars on Ice television special.[23]In Legal Eagles, Robert Redford sings and dances "Singin' in the Rain" when he cannot sleep.In the Pixar film Wall-E (2008), the robot Wall-E briefly swings himself around a light pole in an echo of the "Singin' in the Rain" number.Gene Kelly's "Singin' in the Rain" sequence is one of the opening scenes of The Great Movie Ride at Disney's Hollywood Studios. Kelly approved his Audio-Animatronics likeness prior to its delivery to Florida.The dance to the title song is parodied in the Broadway musical Spamalot in the dance break to "Always Look on the Bright Side of Life," complete with tap dancing in raincoats and twirling umbrellas.In The Simpsons episode "Brawl in the Family", Groundskeeper Willie was singing with an umbrella, but in acid rain.In the Family Guy episode, "Believe It or Not, Joe's Walking on Air", Joe, Peter, Quagmire, Cleveland and Stewie performed a partial rendition of the "Good Morning" dance routine. Also, in the episode, "Peterotica", Quagmire recreates the "Make 'Em Laugh" number.In the Glee episode "The Substitute," Will Schuester and Mike Chang perform the "Make 'Em Laugh" song and dance routine as a duo (which was the hallucination of a sick Will). The cast also performs a mash-up of "Singin' in the Rain" and Rihanna's "Umbrella" at the end of the episode.In the 1998 American remake of the film Godzilla, the main character Dr. Niko Tatopoulos sings the "Singin' in the Rain" song.A 2005 Volkswagen Golf GTI commercial features Kelly's "Singin' in the Rain" sequence, but with Kelly performing hip-hop dance moves and a remixed version of the song playing in the background.In the 2003 film Shanghai Knights, Jackie Chan imitates Gene Kelly's dance moves (complete with umbrella) towards the end of a fight scene set in London, England. The original "Singing in the Rain" music plays over this sequence as a tribute.On The Muppet Show the Muppets want Gene Kelly to recreate "Singin' in the Rain" on a reconstructed set, though all he finally does is hum it as he crosses the stage.On episode 7, Season 35 of Saturday Night Live, Joseph Gordon-Levitt imitates Donald O'Connor's "Make 'Em Laugh" dance sequence for his opening monologue.Hess, Earl J., and Pratibha A. Dabholkar. Singin in the Rain: The Making of an American Masterpiece (Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2009) 331 pp. ISBN 978-0-7006-1656-5Singin' in the Rain at the Internet Movie DatabaseSingin' in the Rain at Rotten TomatoesSingin' in the Rain at the TCM Movie DatabaseSingin' in the Rain at AllRoviRoger Ebert's reviewVery detailed review from filmsite.org100 Greatest Film MusicalsSingin' in the Rain: The Making of an American Masterpiece (A book with the complete history of this classic movie.)(French) Movie photos and lobby postersSpeaking vs. Dancing in the Rain: An essay on the importance of the "completely unrelated" 14-minute ballet sequenceLiterature on Singin' in the RainIt's a Wonderful Life is an American Christmas drama film produced and directed by Frank Capra, that was based on the short story "The Greatest Gift", written by Philip Van Doren Stern in 1939, and privately published by the author in 1945.[3] The film is considered one of the most inspirational and best loved movies in American cinema as it currently holds an 8.7 out of 10 rating on the IMDb consumer reviews and a 93% "Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes.Released in 1946, the film stars James Stewart as George Bailey, a man who has given up his dreams in order to help others, and whose imminent suicide on Christmas Eve brings about the intervention of his guardian angel, Clarence Odbody (Henry Travers). Clarence shows George all the lives he has touched and how different life in his community would be had he never been born.Despite initially being considered a box office flop due to high production costs and stiff competition at the time of its release, the film has come to be regarded as a classic and is a staple of Christmas television around the world.[4] Theatrically, the film's break-even point was actually $6.3million, approximately twice the production cost, a figure it never came close to achieving in its initial release. An appraisal in 2006 reported: "Although it was not the complete box-office failure that today everyone believes... it was initially a major disappointment and confirmed, at least to the studios, that Capra was no longer capable of turning out the populist features that made his films the must-see, money-making events they once were."[5]The film was nominated for five Oscars without winning any, the film has since been recognized by the American Film Institute as one of the 100 best American films ever made,[6] placing number 11 on its initial 1998 greatest movie list, and would also place number one on its list of the most inspirational American films of all time.[7]In Bedford Falls, New York[N 2] on Christmas Eve, George Bailey (James Stewart) is deeply troubled. Prayers for his well-being from friends and family reach Heaven. Clarence Odbody (Henry Travers), Angel Second Class, is assigned to save George and earn his wings. Franklin and Joseph, the head angels, review George's life with Clarence. At the age of 12, George (Bobby Anderson) saved his younger brother Harry (George Nokes), who had fallen through the ice on a frozen pond, though, because of this heroic action, George lost the hearing in his left ear. Later, working in the local pharmacy, George noticed that the druggist, Mr. Gower (H. B. Warner), despondent over his son's death, had mistakenly filled a child's prescription with poison, and saved Gower from killing the child and irrevocably ruining his own life.George repeatedly sacrifices his dream to travel the world. He waits for Harry (Todd Karns) to graduate from high school and replace him at the Bailey Building and Loan Association, vital to the townspeople. On Harry's graduation night, George, now 21, discusses his future with Mary Hatch (Donna Reed), who has long had a crush on him. Later that evening, George's absent-minded Uncle Billy (Thomas Mitchell) interrupts them to tell George that his father has had a stroke, which proves fatal. A few months later, Mr. Henry F. Potter (Lionel Barrymore), a slumlord and majority shareholder in the Building and Loan, tries to persuade the board of directors to stop providing home loans for the working poor. George talks them into rejecting Potter's proposal, but they agree only on condition that George run the Building and Loan. Giving his college money to Harry, George delays his plans with the understanding that Harry will take over upon graduation.When Harry graduates from college, he unexpectedly brings home a wife, whose father has offered Harry an excellent job. Although Harry vows to decline the offer out of respect for his brother, George cannot deny Harry such a fine opportunity and decides to keep full ownership of the Building and Loan, knowing that this will kill his dream to travel the world.George calls on Mary, who has recently returned home from college. After several arguments, they reveal their love for each other, and marry soon after. As they depart for their honeymoon, they witness a run on the bank that leaves the Building and Loan in danger of collapse. The couple quells the panic by using the $2,000 earmarked for their honeymoon to satisfy the depositors' immediate needs. Mary enlists the help of George's two best friends, Bert, a policeman, and Ernie, a cab driver, to create a faux tropical setting for a substitute honeymoon. The couple embrace while Bert and Ernie sing in the background.George and Mary raise four children: Pete, Janie, Tommy and Zuzu. George starts Bailey Park, an affordable housing project. Potter tries to hire him away, offering him a $20,000 salary,[N 3] along with the promise of distant business trips, something that George always wanted to do. George, initially tempted, turns Potter down after realizing that Potter intends to close down the Building and Loan and take full control of Bedford Falls.When World War II erupts, George is unable to enlist, due to his bad ear. Harry becomes a Navy fighter pilot and shoots down 15 enemy planes, two of which were targeting a ship full of troops in the Pacific. For his bravery, Harry is awarded the Medal of Honor.On Christmas Eve morning, Uncle Billy is on his way to Potter's bank to deposit $8,000 of the Building and Loan's cash funds. He greets Potter (who has the newspaper reporting Harry's heroics) and taunts him by reading the headlines aloud. Potter angrily snatches the paper, but Billy inattentively allows the money to be snatched with it. Potter opens the paper, notices the money and keeps it, knowing that displacement of bank money would result in bankruptcy for the Building and Loan and criminal charges for George. When a frantic search turns up with nothing, and with a bank examiner due that day, George takes his anger and frustrations out on his family.A desperate George appeals to Potter for a loan. Potter mockingly and coldly turns George down, and then swears out a warrant for his arrest for bank fraud. George, now completely depressed, gets drunk at the bar owned by his friend, Giuseppe Martini (Bill Edmunds), where he silently prays for help. After crashing his car into a tree, George staggers to a bridge, intending to commit suicide, feeling he is "worth more dead than alive" because of a life insurance policy. Before he can leap, Clarence jumps in first and pretends to be drowning. After George rescues him, Clarence reveals himself to be George's guardian angel.George does not believe him, but when he bitterly wishes he had never been born, Clarence shows George what the town would have been like without him. Bedford Falls, named Pottersville, is home to sleazy nightclubs, pawn shops and amoral people. Bailey Park is never built. Mr. Gower was sent to prison for poisoning the child and is a despised derelict. Martini does not own the bar, and is nowhere to be found. George's friend Violet Bick (Gloria Grahame) is a strip-dancer and gets arrested as a pickpocket. Ernie is helplessly poor with his family having left him. Uncle Billy has been in an insane asylum for years. Harry is dead as a result of George not being there to save him from drowning, and the servicemen he would have saved also died. Ma Bailey is a bitter widow, and Mary a single spinster librarian.George runs back to the bridge and begs to be allowed to live again. His prayer is answered, and he runs home joyously, where the authorities are waiting to arrest him. Mary, Uncle Billy, and a flood of townspeople arrive with more than enough donations to save George and the Building and Loan. George's friend Sam Wainwright sends him a $25,000 line of credit by telegram. Harry also arrives to support his brother, who is now "The richest man in town". George finds a copy of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer with the inscription, "Dear George: Remember no man is a failure who has friends. P.S. Thanks for the wings! Love, Clarence." A bell rings, and his daughter Zuzu remembers that it means an angel has earned his wings. George realizes that he truly has a wonderful life.The contention that James Stewart is often referred to as Capra's only choice to play George Bailey is disputed by film historian Stephen Cox, who indicates that "Henry Fonda was in the running."[12][13]Although it was stated that Jean Arthur, Ann Dvorak and Ginger Rogers were all considered for the role of Mary before Donna Reed won the part, this list is also disputed by Cox as he indicates that Jean Arthur was first offered the part but had to turn it down for a prior commitment on Broadway before Capra turned to Olivia de Havilland, Martha Scott and Ann Dvorak. Ginger Rogers was offered the female lead, but turned it down because she considered it "too bland". In Chapter 26 of her autobiography Ginger: My Story, she questioned her decision by asking her readers: "Foolish, you say?"A long list of actors were considered for the role of Potter (originally named Herbert Potter): Edward Arnold, Charles Bickford, Edgar Buchanan, Louis Calhern, Victor Jory, Raymond Massey, Vincent Price and even Thomas Mitchell.[13] However, Lionel Barrymore, who eventually won the role, was a famous Ebenezer Scrooge in radio dramatizations of A Christmas Carol at the time and was a natural choice for the role. Barrymore had also worked with Capra on his 1938 Best Picture Oscar winner, You Can't Take It with You.H. B. Warner, who was cast as the drugstore owner Mr. Gower, actually studied medicine before going into acting. He was also in some of Capra's other films, including Mr. Deeds Goes to Town, Lost Horizon, You Can't Take It with You, and Mr. Smith Goes to Washington.[14] The name Gower came from Capra's employer Columbia Pictures, which had been located on Gower St. for many years. Also on Gower St. was a drugstore that was a favorite for the studio's employees.[15]Charles Williams, who was cast as Eustace Bailey, and Mary Treen, who was cast as Matilda "Tilly" Bailey, were both B-list actors, as they both had appeared in 90 films each before filming It's a Wonderful Life.[16]Jimmy the Raven (Uncle Billy's pet) appeared in You Can't Take It with You and each subsequent Capra film.[12][17]The original story "The Greatest Gift" was written by Philip Van Doren Stern in November 1939. After being unsuccessful in getting the story published, he decided to make it into a Christmas card, and mailed 200 copies to family and friends in December 1943.[18][N 5] The story came to the attention of RKO producer David Hempstead, who showed it to Cary Grant's Hollywood agent, and in April 1944, RKO Pictures bought the rights to the story for $10,000, hoping to turn the story into a vehicle for Grant.[20] RKO created three unsatisfactory scripts before shelving the planned movie, and Grant went on to make another Christmas movie staple, The Bishop's Wife.[N 6][22]At the suggestion of RKO studio chief Charles Koerner, Frank Capra read "The Greatest Gift" and immediately saw its potential. RKO, anxious to unload the project, in 1945 sold the rights to Capra's production company, Liberty Films, which had a nine-film distribution agreement with RKO, for $10,000,[N 7] and threw in the three scripts for free.[18] Capra, along with writers Frances Goodrich and Albert Hackett with Jo Swerling, Michael Wilson, and Dorothy Parker brought in to "polish" the script[24] turned the story and what was worth using from the three scripts into a screenplay that Capra would rename It's a Wonderful Life.[18] The script underwent many revisions throughout pre-production and during filming.[25] Final screenplay credit went to Goodrich, Hackett and Capra, with "additional scenes" by Jo Swerling.Seneca Falls, New York claims that when Frank Capra visited their town in 1945, he was inspired to model Bedford Falls after it. The town has an annual It's a Wonderful Life festival in December.[26] In mid-2009, The Hotel Clarence opened in Seneca Falls, named for George Bailey's guardian angel. On December 10, 2010, the "It's a Wonderful Life" Museum opened in Seneca Falls, with Karolyn Grimes, who played Zuzu in the movie, cutting the ribbon.[27]Both James Stewart, (from Indiana, Pennsylvania), and Donna Reed, (from Denison, Iowa), came from small towns. Stewart's father ran a small hardware store where James worked for years. Reed demonstrated her rural roots by winning an impromptu bet with Lionel Barrymore when he challenged her to milk a cow on set.[28]It's a Wonderful Life was shot at the RKO studio in Culver City, California, and the RKO Ranch in Encino, where "Bedford Falls" was a set covering 4 acres (1.6 ha), assembled from three separate parts with a main street stretching 300yards (three city blocks), with 75 stores and buildings, a tree-lined center parkway and 20 full grown oak trees. For months prior to principal photography, the mammoth set was populated by pigeons, cats and dogs in order to give the "town" a lived-in feel.[17] Due to the requirement to film in an "alternate universe" setting as well as during different seasons, the set was extremely adaptable. RKO created "chemical snow" for the film in order to avoid the need for dubbed dialogue when actors walked across the earlier type of movie snow, made up of crushed cornflakes.[29] Filming started on April 15, 1946 and ended on July 27, 1946, exactly on deadline for the 90-day principal photography schedule.[21]The RKO ranch in Encino, the filming location of "Bedford Falls", was razed in the mid-1950s.[N 8] There are only two surviving locations from the film. The first is the swimming pool that was unveiled during the famous dance scene where George courts Mary. It is located in the gymnasium at Beverly Hills High School and is still in operation as of 2008. The second is the "Martini home", at 4587 Viro Road in La Caada Flintridge, California.[31]During filming, in the scene where Uncle Billy gets drunk at Harry and Ruth's welcome home/newlyweds' party, George points him in the right direction home. As the camera focuses on George, smiling at his uncle staggering away, a crash is heard in the distance and Uncle Billy yells, "I'm all right! I'm all right!" Equipment on the set had actually been accidentally knocked over Capra left in Thomas Mitchell's impromptu ad lib (although the "crashing" noise was augmented with added sound effects).Dimitri Tiomkin had written Death Telegram and Gower's Deliverance for the drugstore scenes, but in the editing room Capra elected to go with no music for those scenes. Those changes, along with others, led to a falling out between Tiomkin and Capra. Tiomkin had worked on a lot of Capra's previous films, and was saddened that Capra decided to have the music pared or toned down, moved, or cut entirely. He felt as though his work was being seen as a mere suggestion. In his autobiography Please Don't Hate Me, he said of the incident, "an all around scissors job".[32]The products and advertisements featured in Mr. Gower's drugstore include Coca-Cola, Paterson tobacco pipes, La Unica cigars, Camel cigarettes, Lucky Strike cigarettes, Chesterfield cigarettes, Vaseline hair tonic, Penetro cough syrup, Pepto-Bismol, Bayer Aspirin ("for colds and influenza"), and The Saturday Evening Post.[33]In an earlier draft of the script, the scene where George saves his brother Harry as a child was different. The scene had the boys playing hockey on the river (which is on Potter's property) as Potter watches with disdain. George shoots the puck, but it goes astray and breaks the "No Trespassing" sign and lands in Potter's yard. Potter becomes irate, and the gardener releases the attack dogs, which causes the boys to flee. Harry falls in the ice, and George saves him with the same results.[34]Another scene that was in an earlier version was where young George visits his father at his work. After George tells off Mr. Potter and closes the door, he considers asking Uncle Billy about his drugstore dilemma. Billy is talking on the phone to the bank examiner, and lights his cigar and throws his match in the wastebasket. This scene explains that Tilly (short for Matilda) and Eustace are both his cousins (not Billy's kids though), and Tilly is on the phone with her friend Martha and says, "Potter's here, the bank examiner's coming. It's a day of judgment." As George is about to interrupt Tilly on the phone, Billy cried for help and Tilly runs in and puts the fire out with a pot of coffee. George decides he is probably better off dealing with the situation by himself.[32]Capra had filmed a number of sequences that were subsequently cut, the only remnants remaining being rare stills that have been unearthed.[35] A number of alternative endings were considered, with Capra's first script having Bailey falling to his knees reciting The Lord's Prayer (the script also called for an opening scene with the townspeople in prayer). Feeling that an overly religious tone did not have the emotional impact of the family and friends rushing to rescue George Bailey, the closing scenes were rewritten.[36][37][38]It's a Wonderful Life premiered at the Globe Theatre in New York on December 20, 1946, to mixed reviews.[21] While Capra considered the contemporary critical reviews to be either universally negative or at best dismissive,[39] Time said, "It's a Wonderful Life is a pretty wonderful movie. It has only one formidable rival (Goldwyn's The Best Years of Our Lives) as Hollywood's best picture of the year. Director Capra's inventiveness, humor and affection for human beings keep it glowing with life and excitement."[40] Bosley Crowther, writing for The New York Times, complimented some of the actors, including Stewart and Reed, but concluded that "the weakness of this picture, from this reviewer's point of view, is the sentimentality of it its illusory concept of life. Mr. Capra's nice people are charming, his small town is a quite beguiling place and his pattern for solving problems is most optimistic and facile. But somehow they all resemble theatrical attitudes rather than average realities."[41]The film, which went into general release on January 7, 1947, placed 26th ($3.3 million) in box office revenues for 1947[2] (out of more than 400 features released),[42] one place ahead of another Christmas movie, Miracle on 34th Street. The film was supposed to be released in January 1947, but was moved up to December 1946 to make it eligible for the 1946 Academy Awards. This move was seen as worse for the movie, as 1947 did not have quite the stiff competition as 1946. If it had entered the 1947 Awards, its biggest competition would have been Miracle On 34th Street. The number one grossing movie of 1947, The Best Years of Our Lives, made $11.5 million.[2]The film recorded a loss of $525,000 at the box office for RKO.[43]On May 26, 1947, the FBI issued a memo stating "With regard to the picture "It's a Wonderful Life", [redacted] stated in substance that the film represented rather obvious attempts to discredit bankers by casting Lionel Barrymore as a 'scrooge-type' so that he would be the most hated man in the picture. This, according to these sources, is a common trick used by Communists. [In] addition, [redacted] stated that, in his opinion, this picture deliberately maligned the upper class, attempting to show the people who had money were mean and despicable characters."[44][45]In an interview with Michael Parkinson in 1973, Jimmy Stewart declared that out of all the movies he had made, It's a Wonderful Life was his favorite.In 1990, It's a Wonderful Life was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in their National Film Registry.In 2002, Britain's Channel 4 ranked It's a Wonderful Life as the seventh greatest film ever made in its poll "The 100 Greatest Films" and in 2006, the film reached #37 in the same channel's "100 Greatest Family Films".In June 2008, AFI revealed its 10 Top 10, the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genres, after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. It's a Wonderful Life was acknowledged as the third-best film in the fantasy genre.[46][47]Somewhat more iconoclastic views of the film and its content are occasionally expressed. In 1947, film critic Manny Farber wrote, "To make his points [Capra] always takes an easy, simple-minded path that doesn't give much credit to the intelligence of the audience", and adds that there are only a "few unsentimental moments here and there."[48][N 9] Wendell Jamieson, in a 2008 article for The New York Times which was otherwise positive in its analysis of the film, posited that it "is a terrifying, asphyxiating story about growing up and relinquishing your dreams, of seeing your father driven to the grave before his time, of living among bitter, small-minded people. It is a story of being trapped, of compromising, of watching others move ahead and away, of becoming so filled with rage that you verbally abuse your children, their teacher and your oppressively perfect wife."[49]In a 2010 Salon.com piece, Richard Cohen described It's a Wonderful Life as "the most terrifying Hollywood film ever made"; in the "Pottersville" sequence, he wrote, George is not "seeing the world that would exist had he never been born", but rather "the world as it does exist, in his time and also in our own."[50] Nine years earlier, another Salon writer, Gary Kamiya, had expressed the opposing view that "Pottersville rocks!", adding, "The gauzy, Currier-and-Ives veil Capra drapes over Bedford Falls has prevented viewers from grasping what a tiresome and, frankly, toxic environment it is."[51]The film's elevation to the status of a beloved classic came decades after its initial release, when it became a television staple during 1970s and 1980s Christmas seasons. This came as a welcome surprise to Frank Capra and others involved with its production. "It's the damnedest thing I've ever seen," Capra told the Wall Street Journal in 1984. "The film has a life of its own now, and I can look at it like I had nothing to do with it. I'm like a parent whose kid grows up to be president. I'm proud... but it's the kid who did the work. I didn't even think of it as a Christmas story when I first ran across it. I just liked the idea."[52] In a 1946 interview, Capra described the film's theme as "the individual's belief in himself" and that he made it "to combat a modern trend toward atheism".[52]Prior to the Los Angeles release of It's a Wonderful Life, Liberty Films mounted an extensive promotional campaign that included a daily advertisement highlighting one of the film's players, along with comments from reviewers. Jimmy Starr wrote, "If I were an Oscar, I'd elope with It's a Wonderful Life lock, stock and barrel on the night of the Academy Awards". The New York Daily Times offered an editorial in which it declared the film and James Stewart's performance to be worthy of Academy Award consideration.[53]It's a Wonderful Life received five Academy Award nominations:[54]The Best Years of Our Lives, a drama about servicemen attempting to return to their pre-World War II lives, won most of the awards that year, including four of the five for which It's a Wonderful Life was nominated. (The award for "Best Sound Recording" was won by The Jolson Story.) The Best Years of Our Lives was also an outstanding commercial success, ultimately becoming the highest grossing film of the decade, in contrast to the more modest initial box office returns of It's a Wonderful Life.[55]Capra won the "Best Motion Picture Director" award from the Golden Globes, and a "CEC Award" from the Cinema Writers Circle in Spain, for Mejor Pelcula Extranjera (Best Foreign Film). Jimmy Hawkins won a "Former Child Star Lifetime Achievement Award" from the Young Artist Awards in 1994; the award recognized his role as Tommy Bailey as igniting his career, which lasted until the mid-1960s.[56]American Film Institute ListsLiberty Films was purchased by Paramount Pictures, and remained a subsidiary until 1951. In 1955, M. & A. Alexander purchased the movie. This included key rights to the original television syndication, the original nitrate film elements, the music score, and the film rights to the story on which the film is based, "The Greatest Gift".[N 10] National Telefilm Associates (NTA) took over the rights to the film soon thereafter.A clerical error at NTA prevented the copyright from being renewed properly in 1974.[60][61] Despite the lapsed copyright, television stations that aired it still were required to pay royalties. Although the film's images had entered the public domain, the film's story was still protected by virtue of it being a derivative work of the published story "The Greatest Gift", whose copyright was properly renewed by Philip Van Doren Stern in 1971.[62][63][N 11] The film became a perennial holiday favorite in the 1980s, possibly due to its repeated showings each holiday season on hundreds of local television stations. It was mentioned during the deliberations on the Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998.[62][64]In 1993, Republic Pictures, which was the successor to NTA, relied on the 1990 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Stewart v. Abend (which involved another Stewart film, Rear Window) to enforce its claim to the copyright. While the film's copyright had not been renewed, Republic still owned the original film elements, the music score, and the film rights to "The Greatest Gift"; thus the plaintiffs were able to argue its status as a derivative work of a work still under copyright.[62][65] It's a Wonderful Life is no longer shown as often on television as it was before enforcement of that derivative copyright. NBC is licensed to show the film on U.S. network television, and traditionally shows it twice during the holidays, with one showing on Christmas Eve. Paramount (via parent company Viacom's 1998 acquisition of Republic's then-parent, Spelling Entertainment) once again has distribution rights for the first time since 1955.[62][66]Due to all the above actions, this is one of the few RKO films not controlled by Turner Entertainment/Warner Bros. in the USA. It is also one of two Capra films which Paramount owns despite not having originally released it the other is Broadway Bill (originally from Columbia, remade by Paramount as Riding High in 1950).[62]Director Frank Capra met with Wilson Markle about having Colorization, Inc., colorize It's a Wonderful Life based on an enthusiastic response to the colorization of Topper from actor Cary Grant.[67] The company's art director Brian Holmes prepared 10 minutes of colorized footage from It's a Wonderful Life for Capra to view, which resulted in Capra signing a contract with Colorization, Inc., and his "enthusiastic agree[ment] to pay half the $260,000 cost of colorizing the movie and to share any profits" and giving "preliminary approval to making similar color versions of two of his other black-and-white films, Meet John Doe (1941) and Lady for a Day (1933)".[67] However, the film was believed to be in the public domain at the time, and as a result Markle and Holmes responded by returning Capra's initial investment, eliminating his financial participation, and refusing outright to allow the director to exercise artistic control over the colorization of his films, leading Capra to join in the campaign against the process.[67]Three colorized versions have been produced. The first was released by Hal Roach Studios in 1986. The second was authorized and produced by the film's permanent owner, Republic Pictures, in 1989, with better results. Both Capra and Stewart took a critical stand on the colorized editions.[68] The Hal Roach color version was re-released in 1989 to VHS through the cooperation of Video Treasures. A third colorized version was produced by Legend Films and released on DVD in 2007 with the approval of Capra's estate.[citation needed]Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s, when the film was still under public domain status, It's A Wonderful Life was released on VHS by a variety of home video companies. Among the companies that released the film on home video before Republic Pictures stepped in were Meda Video (which would later become Media Home Entertainment), Kartes Video Communications (under its Video Film Classics label), GoodTimes Home Video, and Video Treasures (now Anchor Bay Entertainment). After Republic reclaimed the rights to the film, all unofficial VHS copies of the film in print were destroyed.[65] Artisan Entertainment (under license from Republic) took over home video rights in the mid-1990s. Artisan was later sold to Lions Gate Entertainment, which continued to hold US home video rights until late 2005 when they reverted to Paramount, who also owns video rights throughout Region 4 (Latin America and Australia), and in France. Video rights in the rest of the world are held by different companies; for example, the UK rights are with Universal Studios.In 1993, due in part to the confusion of the ownership and copyright issues, Kinesoft Development, with the support of Republic Pictures, released It's a Wonderful Life as one of the first commercial feature-length films on CD-ROM for the Windows PC (Windows 3.1). Predating commercial DVDs by several years, it included such features as the ability to follow along with the complete shooting script as the film was playing.[69] [N 12]Given the state of video playback on the PC at the time of its release, It's a Wonderful Life for Windows represented another first, as the longest running video on a computer. Prior to its release, Windows could only play back approx. 32,000 frames of video, or about 35 minutes at 15 frames per second. Working with Microsoft, Kinesoft was able to enhance the video features of Windows to allow for the complete playback of the entire film all of this on a PC with a 486SX processor and only 8MB of RAM.[70]The movie has seen multiple DVD releases since the availability of the DVD format. In the fall of 2001, Republic issued the movie twice, once in August, and again with different packaging in September of that same year. On October 31, 2006, Paramount released a newly restored "60th Anniversary Edition". On November 13, 2007, Paramount released a two-disc "special edition" DVD of the film that contained both the original theatrical black-and-white version, and a new, third colorized version, produced by Legend Films using the latest colorization technology. On November 3, 2009, Paramount released a DVD version with a "Collector's Edition Ornament", and a Blu-ray edition.The film was twice adapted for radio in 1947, first on Lux Radio Theater (March 10) and then on The Screen Guild Theater (December 29), then again on the Screen Guild Theater broadcast of March 15, 1951. James Stewart and Donna Reed reprised their roles for all three radio productions. Stewart also starred in the May 8, 1949 radio adaptation presented on the Screen Director's Playhouse.A musical stage adaptation of the film, titled A Wonderful Life, was written by Sheldon Harnick and Joe Raposo. This version was first performed at the University of Michigan in 1986, but a planned professional production was stalled by legal wrangling with the estate of Philip Van Doren Stern. It was eventually performed in Washington, DC by Arena Stage in 1991, and had revivals in the 21st century, including a staged concert version in New York City in 2005 and several productions by regional theatres.Another musical stage adaptation of the film, titled "It's a Wonderful Life - The Musical", was written by Bruce Greer and Keith Ferguson. This version premiered at the Majestic Theatre (Dallas, Texas) in 1998. It was an annual Christmas show at the theatre for five years. It has since been performed at venues all around the United States.[71]The film was also adapted into a play in two acts by James W. Rodgers. It was first performed on December 15, 1993 at Paul Laurence Dunbar High School. The play opens with George Bailey contemplating suicide and then goes back through major moments in his life. Many of the scenes from the movie are only alluded to or mentioned in the play rather than actually dramatized. For example, in the opening scene Clarence just mentions George having saved his brother Harry after the latter had fallen through the ice.[72]It's a Wonderful Life: A Live Radio Play, a stage adaptation presented as a 1940s radio show, was adapted by Joe Landry and has been produced around the United States since 1997. The script is published by Playscripts, Inc.Philip Grecian's 2006 radio play based on the film It's a Wonderful Life is a faithful adaptation, now in its third incarnation, that has been performed numerous times by local theatres in Canada.[73]In a June 2011 interview, John McDaniel told Saint Louis Magazine, "I'm in the throes of writing a musical version... right now, working with Kathie Lee Gifford, who's doing the lyrics. I find we're mostly writing to character: Is it George, or the old guy who runs the bank? What do they want, what are they trying to do, what is the mood of that is it staccato, are they agitated, is it a ballad?"[74]The Last Temptation of Clarence Odbody is a novel written by John Pierson. The novel imagines the future lives of various characters if George had not survived his jump into the river.[75]It's a Wonderful Life has been popularized in modern cultural references in many of the mainstream media. Due to the proliferation of these references, only a few examples will suffice to illustrate the film's impact.Film historian and reviewer James Berardinelli elaborated on the parallels between this film and the classic Dickens tale A Christmas Carol. In both stories, a man revisits his life and potential death (or non-existence) with the help of supernatural agents, culminating in a joyous epiphany and a renewed view of his life.[79]The film was remade as the 1977 television movie It Happened One Christmas. Lionel Chetwynd based the screenplay on the original Van Doren Stern short story and the 1946 screenplay. This remake employed gender-reversal, with Marlo Thomas as the protagonist Mary Bailey, Wayne Rogers as George Hatch, and Cloris Leachman as the angel Clara Oddbody.[N 13] Leachman received her second Emmy nomination for this role. In a significant departure from his earlier roles, Orson Welles was cast as Mr. Potter.[N 14] Following initial positive reviews, the made-for-television film was rebroadcast twice in 1978 and 1979, but has not been shown since on national re-broadcasts, nor issued in home media.[N 15][80]In 1991, another made-for-television movie called Clarence starred Robert Carradine in a new tale of the helpful angel.[81][82]Streaming audioDecember 20, 1946(1946-12-20)1 Plot2 Cast

2.1 Casting

2.1 Casting3 Production

3.1 Background
3.2 Filming

3.1 Background3.2 Filming4 Reception5 Awards and honors6 Release

6.1 Ownership and copyright issues

6.1.1 Ancillary rights
6.1.2 Colorization


6.2 Home media releases

6.2.1 VHS versions
6.2.2 Technological first: CD-ROM version
6.2.3 DVD and Blu-ray versions



6.1 Ownership and copyright issues

6.1.1 Ancillary rights
6.1.2 Colorization

6.1.1 Ancillary rights6.1.2 Colorization6.2 Home media releases

6.2.1 VHS versions
6.2.2 Technological first: CD-ROM version
6.2.3 DVD and Blu-ray versions

6.2.1 VHS versions6.2.2 Technological first: CD-ROM version6.2.3 DVD and Blu-ray versions7 Adaptations in other media8 Popular culture

8.1 Antecedents
8.2 Spin-offs

8.1 Antecedents8.2 Spin-offs9 See also10 References

10.1 Notes
10.2 Citations
10.3 Bibliography

10.1 Notes10.2 Citations10.3 Bibliography11 Further reading12 External links2.1 Casting3.1 Background3.2 Filming6.1 Ownership and copyright issues

6.1.1 Ancillary rights
6.1.2 Colorization

6.1.1 Ancillary rights6.1.2 Colorization6.2 Home media releases

6.2.1 VHS versions
6.2.2 Technological first: CD-ROM version
6.2.3 DVD and Blu-ray versions

6.2.1 VHS versions6.2.2 Technological first: CD-ROM version6.2.3 DVD and Blu-ray versions6.1.1 Ancillary rights6.1.2 Colorization6.2.1 VHS versions6.2.2 Technological first: CD-ROM version6.2.3 DVD and Blu-ray versions8.1 Antecedents8.2 Spin-offs10.1 Notes10.2 Citations10.3 BibliographyJames Stewart as George BaileyDonna Reed as Mary Hatch BaileyHenry Travers as Clarence OdbodyLionel Barrymore as Mr. Henry F. PotterThomas Mitchell as Uncle Billy BaileyBeulah Bondi as Ma BaileyFrank Faylen as Ernie BishopWard Bond as Bert, the copGloria Grahame as Violet BickH. B. Warner as Mr. GowerTodd Karns as Harry BaileySamuel S. Hinds as Peter "Pop" BaileyLillian Randolph as AnnieMary Treen as Cousin TillyFrank Albertson as Sam WainwrightVirginia Patton as Ruth Dakin BaileyCharles Williams as Cousin EustaceSarah Edwards as Mrs. HatchWilliam Edmunds as Giuseppe MartiniArgentina Brunetti as Mrs. MartiniBobby Anderson as Little George BaileyRonnie Ralph as Little Sam WainwrightJean Gale as Little Mary HatchJeanine Ann Roose as Little Violet BickGeorge Nokes as Little Harry BaileyDanny Mummert as Little Marty HatchSheldon Leonard as Nick, the bartenderFrank Hagney as Potter's mute aideCharles Lane as The rent collectorJimmy Hawkins as Tommy BaileyKarolyn Grimes as Zuzu BaileyLarry Simms as Pete BaileyCarol Coomes (AKA Carol Coombs) as Janie BaileyCharles Halton as Carter, bank examiner (uncredited)Joseph Kearns as Angel Joseph (voice, uncredited)Evelyn Moriarty as Girl in the bar (uncredited)Carl "Alfalfa" Switzer as Freddie (Mary's annoying high school suitor)Max Wagner as Cashier/Bouncer at Nick's BarTom Fadden as Bridge Caretaker (uncredited)Stanley Andrews as Mr. Welch (uncredited)Adriana Caselotti as the singer in Martini's Bar (uncredited)[10][N 4]Best Picture for Frank CapraBest Director for Frank CapraBest Actor for James StewartBest Editing for William HornbeckBest Sound Recording for John AalbergAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  #11AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions  #8AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Mr. Potter - #6 Villain
George Bailey - #9 Hero

Mr. Potter - #6 VillainGeorge Bailey - #9 HeroAFI's 100 Years...100 Songs:

Buffalo Gal (Won't You Come Out Tonight) - Nominated[57]

Buffalo Gal (Won't You Come Out Tonight) - Nominated[57]AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"What is it you want, Mary? What do you want? You want the moon? Just say the word, and I'll throw a lasso around it and pull it down." - Nominated[58]
"To my big brother George, the richest man in town!" - Nominated[58]
"Look, Daddy. Teacher says, Every time a bell rings an angel gets his wings." - Nominated[58]

"What is it you want, Mary? What do you want? You want the moon? Just say the word, and I'll throw a lasso around it and pull it down." - Nominated[58]"To my big brother George, the richest man in town!" - Nominated[58]"Look, Daddy. Teacher says, Every time a bell rings an angel gets his wings." - Nominated[58]AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers  #1AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #20AFI's 10 Top 10  #3 Fantasy FilmMr. Potter - #6 VillainGeorge Bailey - #9 HeroBuffalo Gal (Won't You Come Out Tonight) - Nominated[57]"What is it you want, Mary? What do you want? You want the moon? Just say the word, and I'll throw a lasso around it and pull it down." - Nominated[58]"To my big brother George, the richest man in town!" - Nominated[58]"Look, Daddy. Teacher says, Every time a bell rings an angel gets his wings." - Nominated[58]The Sesame Street Muppets characters Bert and Ernie share their names with the cop and the taxicab driver in the film. Longtime Muppets writer and puppeteer Jerry Juhl said he believed there was no connection and that this was a coincidence.[76] The episode Elmo Saves Christmas (1996), which featured a clip from the film, pokes fun at the persistent reports of a connection, having them look at each other in disbelief as George calls Bert and Ernie by name.[76]In a direct reference to the film, The Simpsons episode "The PTA Disbands" places a caricature of James Stewart's character in a local bank, who paraphrases the infamous bank run scene, which promptly starts a brawl.Stephen Jay Gould's book Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale and the Nature of History takes its main title from the film. The book proposes that the evolution of life, rewound and replayed multiple times, would yield a different world each time, just as life without George Bailey is Pottersville, not Bedford Falls.Billy Peltzer's home town of Kingston Falls in the movie Gremlins (1984) is laid out to look like Bedford Falls. Clips from It's A Wonderful Life also appear within the film.[77]The Killers' single "Boots" (2010) is a "Christmas" release in benefit of the RED foundation and directly relates to It's a Wonderful Life, using scenes from the movie in the companion video.[78]In "It's a Hopeful Life", the Christmas 2011 episode of Raising Hope, Jimmy dreams how life for his family would have been had his daughter Hope not been born, including separation for his parents, prostitution for Sabrina and accidental death for Maw Maw, the "Clarence" of this story. The episode's climax has Jimmy running down the main street, shouting "Merry Christmas, movie house!" In an odd coincidence, this is the second time Cloris Leachman has played the angel, having previously starred as Clara in the 1977 TV remake It Happened One Christmas.It Happened One Christmas the 1977 made-for-television remakeMr. Destiny a 1990 filmThe Family Man a 2000 filmAlternate universe in filmdomDastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. (a legal case partially relating to another example of an out of copyright adaption of a work still under copyright)Barker, Martin and Thomas Austin. "Films, Audiences and Analyses". From Antz To Titanic: Reinventing Film Analysis. London: Pluto Press, 2000, pp.1529. ISBN 0-7453-1584-4.Cahill, Marie. It's a Wonderful Life. East Bridgewater, Massachusetts: World Publications Group, 2006. ISBN 978-1-57215-459-9.Capra, Frank. Frank Capra, The Name Above the Title: An Autobiography. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1971. ISBN 0-306-80771-8.Cox, Stephen. It's a Wonderful Life: A Memory Book. Nashville, Tennessee: Cumberland House, 2003. ISBN 1-58182-337-1.Eliot, Mark. Jimmy Stewart: A Biography. New York: Random House, 2006. ISBN 1-4000-5221-1.Finler, Joel W. The Hollywood Story: Everything You Always Wanted to Know About the American Movie Business But Didn't Know Where to Look. London: Pyramid Books, 1988. ISBN 1-85510-009-6.Goodrich, Francis, Albert Hackett and Frank Capra. It's a Wonderful Life: The Complete Script in its Original Form. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1986. ISBN 0-312-43911-3.Jones, Ken D., Arthur F. McClure and Alfred E. Twomey. The Films of James Stewart. New York: Castle Books, 1970.McBride, Joseph. Frank Capra: The Catastrophe of Success. New York: Touchstone Books, 1992. ISBN 0-671-79788-3.Michael, Paul, ed. The Great Movie Book: A Comprehensive Illustrated Reference Guide to the Best-loved Films of the Sound Era. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Inc., 1980. ISBN 0-13-363663-1.Rodgers, James W. It's A Wonderful Life: A Play in Two Acts. Woodstock, Illinois: Dramatic Publishing, 1994. ISBN 0-87129-432-X.Walters, James. "Reclaiming the Real: It's a Wonderful Life (Frank Capra, 1946)". Alternative Worlds in Hollywood Cinema. Bristol UK: Intellect Ltd, 2008, pp.115134. ISBN 978-1-84150-202-1.Wiley, Mason and Damien Bona. Inside Oscar: The Unofficial History of the Academy Awards. New York: Ballantine Books, 1987. ISBN 0-345-34453-7.Willian, Michael. The Essential It's a Wonderful Life: A Scene-by-Scene Guide to the Classic Film, 2nd ed. Chicago: Chicago Review Press, 2006. ISBN 978-1-55652-636-7.Stewart, Jimmy. "Jimmy Stewart Remembers 'It's a Wonderful Life'." 1977. MyMerryChristmas.com, 2012. Web. 09 Jan. 2012.Cox, Stephen. "On a Wing and a Prayer." Los Angeles Times 23 Dec. 2006: E-1. Web. 09 Jan. 2012.Sullivan, Daniel J. "Sentimental Hogwash?: On Capra's It's a Wonderful Life.", Humanitas (2005) 18.1-2: 115-140. Web. 09 Jan. 2012.Kamiya, Gary. "All hail Pottersville!" Salon.com 22 Dec. 2001. Web. 09 Jan. 2012.It's a Wonderful Life at the Internet Movie DatabaseIt's a Wonderful Life at AllRoviThe Making of "It's A Wonderful Life" Frank Capra Online at Eeweems.comDimitri Tiomkin and It's A Wonderful Life at AmericanMusicPreservation.comPhilip Van Doren Stern, "The Greatest Gift", publicly available 1st edition of authenticated reproduction, at sendaframe.comIt's a Wonderful Life on Lux Radio Theater: March 10, 1947It's a Wonderful Life on Screen Directors Playhouse: May 8, 1949Sunset Boulevard (also known as Sunset Blvd.) is a 1950 American film noir directed and co-written by Billy Wilder, and produced and co-written by Charles Brackett. It was named after the boulevard that runs through Los Angeles and Beverly Hills, California.The film stars William Holden as Joe Gillis, an unsuccessful screenwriter, and Gloria Swanson as Norma Desmond, a faded silent movie star who draws him into her fantasy world where she dreams of making a triumphant return to the screen, with Erich von Stroheim as Max Von Mayerling, her butler . Nancy Olson, Fred Clark, Lloyd Gough and Jack Webb play supporting roles. Director Cecil B. DeMille and gossip columnist Hedda Hopper play themselves, and the film includes cameo appearances by leading silent film actors Buster Keaton, H. B. Warner and Anna Q. Nilsson.Praised by many critics when first released, Sunset Boulevard was nominated for eleven Academy Awards and won three. It is widely accepted as a classic, often cited as one of the greatest films of American cinema. Deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the U.S. Library of Congress in 1989, Sunset Boulevard was included in the first group of films selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. In 1998, it was ranked number twelve on the American Film Institute's list of the 100 best American films of the 20th century, and in 2007 it was 16th on their 10th Anniversary list.The film opens with the camera tracking down Sunset Boulevard in Los Angeles, California as police cars begin racing down it. The lifeless body of a young man, Joe Gillis (Holden) floats in the swimming pool of a palatial mansion. As the police begin converging on the house Joe's voice narrates, in flashback style, the events leading up to his own murder.Six months earlier, Joe was down on his luck, unable to find work as a screenwriter, having only made a few undistinguished films in his short career. Broke and on the verge of having his car repossessed, with no other options except a low-paying newspaper job in Ohio, Joe tries to persuade Paramount Pictures producer Sheldrake (Clark) to buy his most recent script, but fails after script reader Betty Schaefer (Olson) gives Sheldrake a harsh critique of the script in her summation. Joe then tries unsuccessfully to borrow money from his friends. Fleeing from repossession men in his car, one of Joe's tires blows out in front of a large and seemingly deserted mansion on Sunset. Hiding the car in the garage, he sets out to explore the decaying house, when a woman inside calls to him. Mistaken for the undertaker to a recently deceased pet chimpanzee, he is ushered in by the mysterious butler, Max Von Mayerling (Von Stroheim). Meeting the woman who owns the house, he recognizes her as long-forgotten silent-film star Norma Desmond (Swanson). When she learns that he is a writer, she invites him in and asks for his opinion on an immense script she has written for a film about Salome that she hopes will revive her faded acting career. Although Joe finds the script awful, he flatters Norma into hiring him as an editor.Joe is put up in her guest room. The next morning he objects when he sees that Max has moved his belongings to the mansion on Norma's orders, and that she has paid his overdue rent. Though he hates being dependent on her, he accepts the situation and begins living at the mansion, first in a room over the garage, then in the mansion itself. As he works on Norma's script, he comes to see how unaware she is of how her fame has died. She refuses to hear any criticism of her work, and makes him watch her old films in the evenings. Although she still receives fan mail, Joe later learns that Max feeds into Norma's fantasy by sending the letters himself. He explains that Norma's state of mind is fragile, and she has attempted suicide in the past.Over the next few weeks, Norma lavishes attention on Joe and buys him expensive clothing, including a tuxedo for a private New Year's Eve party attended only by the two of them. Horrified to learn that she has fallen in love with him, he tries to let her down gently, but she slaps him and retreats to her room. Joe, thinking his time with her is over, escapes to a party at his friend, assistant director Artie Green's (Webb) house, where he meets Betty Schaefer again. While still unimpressed with most of his work, she believes a scene in one of his scripts has potential. Joe half-agrees to work on it with her, and calls the house on Sunset to tell Max he is leaving. However, when Max informs him that Norma has attempted suicide with Joe's razor blade, Joe leaves the party and returns to the mansion, where he apologizes to Norma and makes love to her.After a while, Norma considers her script complete, and sends it to Cecil B. DeMille at Paramount and waits for his answer. Not long afterwards, calls from Paramount asking for Norma begin to arrive. They come from an executive named Gordon Cole, and Norma petulantly refuses to speak to anyone other than DeMille himself. Eventually, she has Max drive her and Joe to the studio in her 1929 Isotta Fraschini Tipo 8A[1], a rare vintage luxury car. While DeMille entertains Norma, many of the older guards, technicians and extras on the set recognize her and welcome her back. Joe and Max, meanwhile, learn that Cole had called because the studio wants to rent her car and has no interest in her script (DeMille tells an assistant in private that the script is awful). Max insists that they hide these facts from her. He later confesses to Joe that he was once a respected film director who discovered Norma as a girl, and was also her first husband, and that he now remains as her servant because he cannot bear to leave her.While Norma undergoes a rigorous series of beauty treatments to prepare for her comeback, Joe has secretly begun to work with Betty on a screenplay. Though she is now engaged to Artie, she falls in love with him. Although he likes her, Joe is dismayed at the triangle in which he is now caught. When Norma discovers the script with Betty's name on it, she phones Betty and insinuates what sort of man Joe really is. Joe, hearing her, invites Betty to the mansion to see for herself. When she arrives, he coldly terminates their relationship by letting her believe that he is a gigolo and prefers to live off Norma. After Betty leaves the mansion in tears, Joe begins packing, having decided to return to Ohio. He bluntly informs Norma of the truth - that there will be no comeback, her fan letters come from Max, and she is forgotten. He ignores Norma's threats to shoot herself, and in a fit of passion she shoots him as he leaves, leaving him dead in the pool.The scene returns to the opening. Still narrating, Joe expresses fear over how Norma will be unable to cope with the disgrace, and the discovery of how forgotten she truly is. By the time the police arrive, however, she has completely broken with reality and slipped into a delusional state of mind, thinking the news cameras are set up for a film shoot. To help the police coax her down the stairs, Max plays along with her hallucination that she is on the set of her new film. He verbally sets up the scene for her, and yells "Action!"; Norma dramatically descends her grand staircase. Joe, in voiceover, remarks that life has decided to spare her the pain of that discovery, and that "The dream she had clung to so desperately had enfolded her." Norma makes a short speech at how happy she is to be back making a film, and delivers the film's most famous line: "All right, Mr. DeMille, I'm ready for my close-up."[2]The street Sunset Boulevard has been associated with Hollywood film production since 1911, when the town's first film studio opened there. The film workers lived modestly in the growing neighborhood, but during the 1920s profits and salaries rose to unprecedented levels. With the advent of the star system, luxurious homes noted for their often incongruous grandeur were built in the area. The stars were the subject of public fascination throughout the world as magazines and newspapers reported the excesses of their lives.[citation needed]Norma Talmadge has been described as "the obvious if unacknowledged source of Norma Desmond, the grotesque, predatory silent movie queen of" the film, itself a malignant misrepresentation of Talmadge starring an actress who had been a rival in the 1920s.[3]As a young man, Billy Wilder was interested in American culture, with much of his interest fueled by the country's films. In the late 1940s, many of the grand Hollywood houses remained, and Wilder, now a Los Angeles resident, found them to be part of his everyday world. Many former stars from the silent era still lived in them, although most were no longer involved in the film business. Wilder wondered how they spent their time now that "the parade had passed them by," and began imagining the story of a star who had lost her celebrity and box-office appeal.[4]According to Brackett, he and Wilder never considered anyone except Gloria Swanson for the role of Norma Desmond. Wilder, however, had a different recollection. He recalled first wanting Mae West and Marlon Brando for the leads, but never approached either with an offer. He contacted Pola Negri by telephone, but had too much difficulty understanding her heavy Polish accent. They also asked Norma Shearer if she would portray Norma Desmond, but she rejected the role due to both her retirement and distaste. They had considered having Shearer play Miss Desmond with Fred MacMurray as her Joe. They approached Greta Garbo with the role, but she had no interest whatsoever. Wilder and Brackett then visited Mary Pickford, but before they even discussed the plot with her, Wilder realized she would consider their proposal of a role in which she would have an affair with a man half her age an insult, and they graciously departed. They had considered pairing Mary Pickford and Montgomery Clift together to play Norma and Joe.[5]According to Wilder, he asked George Cukor for advice, and he suggested Swanson, one of the most feted actresses of the silent-screen era, known for her beauty, talent and extravagant lifestyle. At the peak of her career in 1925, she was said to have received 10,000 fan letters in a single week, and from 1920 until the early 1930s she lived on Sunset Boulevard in an elaborate Italianate palace. In many ways she resembled the Norma Desmond character and, like her, had been unable to make a smooth transition into talking pictures. The similarities ended there, though, as Swanson accepted the end of her film career and in the early 1930s moved to New York City where she worked in radio and, from the mid 1940s, in television. Although Swanson was not seeking a comeback, she was intrigued when Wilder discussed the role with her.[4]Swanson was chagrined at the notion of submitting to a screen test, saying she had "made twenty films for Paramount. Why do they want me to audition?" Her reaction was later echoed in the screenplay when Norma Desmond declares, "without me there wouldn't be any Paramount." In her memoir, Swanson recalled asking Cukor if it was unreasonable to refuse the screen test. He replied that Norma Desmond was the role for which she would be remembered. "If they ask you to do ten screen tests, do ten screen tests, or I will personally shoot you," Cukor replied. His enthusiasm convinced Swanson to participate,[6] and she signed a contract for $50,000.[7] In a 1975 interview, Wilder recalled Swanson's reaction with the observation, "There was a lot of Norma in her, you know."[8]Montgomery Clift was signed to play Joe Gillis for $5,000 per week for a guaranteed twelve weeks, but just before the start of filming he withdrew from the project, claiming his role of a young man involved with an older woman was too close to the one he had played in The Heiress, in which he felt he had been unconvincing. An infuriated Wilder responded, "If he's any kind of actor, he could be convincing making love to any woman."[9] It has been suggested that the fact that Clift was himself having an affair with a much older woman (the singer Libby Holman) was his real reason for withdrawing from the film.[10]Forced to consider the available Paramount stars, Wilder and Brackett focused on William Holden, who had made an impressive debut in Golden Boy in 1939. Following an appearance in Our Town (1940), he served in the military in World War II, and his return to the screen afterward had been moderately successful. He was enthusiastic about the script and eager to accept the role. He did not know that his salary was $39,000 less than that offered to Clift.[11]Erich von Stroheim, a leading film director of the 1920s who had actually directed Swanson, was signed to play Max, Norma's faithful servant and protector. For the role of Betty Schaefer, Wilder wanted a newcomer who could project a wholesome and ordinary image to contrast with Swanson's flamboyant and obsessive Desmond. He chose Nancy Olson, who had recently been considered for the role of Delilah in DeMille's Samson and Delilah.[12]Wilder and Brackett began working on a script in 1948, but the result did not completely satisfy them. In August 1948 D.M. Marshman Jr., formerly a writer for Life, was hired to help develop the storyline after Wilder and Brackett were impressed by a critique he provided of their film The Emperor Waltz (1948).In an effort to keep the full details of the story from Paramount Pictures and avoid the restrictive censorship of the Breen Code, they submitted the script a few pages at a time. The Breen Office insisted certain lines be rewritten, such as Gillis's "I'm up that creek and I need a job," which became "I'm over a barrel. I need a job." Paramount executives thought Wilder was adapting a story called A Can of Beans (which did not exist) and allowed him relative freedom to proceed as he saw fit. Only the first third of the script was written when filming began in early May 1949, and Wilder was unsure how the film would end.[12]The script contains many references to Hollywood and screenwriters, with Joe Gillis making most of the cynical comments. He sums up his film-writing career with the remark, "The last one I wrote was about Okies in the dust bowl. You'd never know, because when it reached the screen, the whole thing played on a torpedo boat." In another exchange, Betty comments to Gillis, "I'd always heard that you had some talent." He replies, "That was last year. This year I'm trying to make a living."[2]The fusion of writer-director Billy Wilder's biting humor and the classic elements of film noir make for a strange kind of comedy, as well as a strange kind of film noir. There are no belly laughs here, but there are certainly strangled giggles: at the pet chimp's midnight funeral, at Joe's discomfited acquiescence to the role of gigolo; at Norma's Mack Sennett-style "entertainments" for her uneasy lover; and at the ritualized solemnity of Norma's "waxworks" card parties, which feature such former luminaries as Buster Keaton as Norma's has-been cronies.[13]Several of Desmond's lines, such as, "All right Mr. DeMille, I'm ready for my close-up," and "I am big, it's the pictures that got small!" are widely remembered and quoted. Much of the film's wit is delivered through Norma Desmond's deadpan comments, which are often followed by sarcastic retorts from Gillis. Desmond appears to not hear some of these comments, as she is absorbed by her own thoughts and in denial, and so some of Gillis's lines are heard only by the audience, with Wilder blurring the line between the events and Gillis's narration. Gillis's response to Desmond's cry that "the pictures got small" is a muttered reply, "I knew something was wrong with them." Wilder often varies the structure, with Desmond taking Gillis's comments seriously and replying in kind. For example, when the two discuss the overwrought script Desmond has been working on, Gillis observes, "They'll love it in Pomona."[14] "They'll love it everyplace," replies Desmond firmly.[2]Film writer Richard Corliss describes Sunset Boulevard as "the definitive Hollywood horror movie," noting that almost everything in the script is "ghoulish." He remarks that the story is narrated by a dead man whom Norma Desmond first mistakes for an undertaker, while most of the film takes place "in an old, dark house that only opens its doors to the living dead." He compares Von Stroheim's character Max with Erik of The Phantom of the Opera, and Norma Desmond with Dracula, noting that, as she seduces Joe Gillis, the camera tactfully withdraws with "the traditional directorial attitude taken towards Dracula's jugular seductions." He writes that the narrative contains an excess of "cheap sarcasm," but ultimately congratulates the writers for attributing this dialogue to Joe Gillis, who was in any case presented as little more than a hack writer.[15]Wilder preferred to leave analysis of his screenplays and films to others. When asked if Sunset Boulevard was a black comedy, he replied, "No, just a picture."[16]The score was composed by Franz Waxman. In 2002 a CD was published of the score re-recorded by Joel McNeely and the Scottish Symphony Orchestra.[17]The film's dark, shadowy black-and-white film noir cinematography was the work of John F. Seitz. Wilder had worked with him several times before, and trusted his judgment, allowing him to make his own decisions. Seitz recalled asking Wilder what he required for the pet chimpanzee's funeral scene. Wilder replied, "you know, just your standard monkey funeral shot." For some interior shots, Seitz sprinkled dust in front of the camera before filming to suggest "mustiness," a trick he had also used for Double Indemnity (1944).Wilder was adamant that the corpse of Joe Gillis be seen from the bottom of the pool, but creating the effect was difficult. The camera was placed inside a specially made box and lowered underwater, but the result disappointed Wilder, who insisted on further experiments. The shot was finally achieved by placing a mirror on the bottom of the pool and filming Holden's reflection from above with the distorted image of the policemen standing around the pool and forming a backdrop.[12]Film historian Tom Stempel writes, "In both Double Indemnity and Sunset Boulevard, Seitz does something that has always impressed me. Both are films noir, and he finesses the fact that both are set in the sunniest of locales, Los Angeles... he brings together the light and the dark in the same film without any seams showing... he brings together the realistic lighting of Joe Gillis out in the real world with the gothic look of Norma Desmond's mansion. Again with no seams showing."[12]Edith Head designed the costumes. Wilder, Head and Swanson agreed that Norma Desmond would have kept somewhat up to date with fashion trends, so Head designed costumes closely resembling the Dior look of the mid-1940s. Embellishments were added to personalize them and reflect Norma Desmond's taste. Swanson recalled in her biography that the costumes were only "a trifle outdated, a trifle exotic."[6] Head later described her assignment as "the most challenging of my career," and explained her approach with the comment, "Because Norma Desmond was an actress who had become lost in her own imagination, I tried to make her look like she was always impersonating someone." Head later said she relied on Swanson's expertise because "she was creating a past that she knew and I didn't."[12]Head also designed the costumes for William Holden and the minor characters; but for authenticity, Wilder instructed Von Stroheim and Nancy Olson to wear their own clothing.The film was scored by Franz Waxman. His theme for Norma Desmond was based on tango music, inspired by her having danced the tango with Rudolph Valentino. This style was contrasted with Joe Gillis's bebop theme. Waxman also used distorted arrangements of popular film-music styles from the 1920s and 1930s to suggest Norma Desmond's state of mind. The film's soundtrack was released on compact disc for the first time in 2002.The overstated decadence of Norma Desmond's home was created by set designer Hans Dreier, whose career extended back to the silent era. He had also done the interior design for some movie stars' houses, including Mae West's. William Haines, an interior designer and former actor, later defended criticism of Dreier's set design with the observation, "Bebe Daniels, Norma Shearer and Pola Negri all had homes with ugly interiors like that."[12]During filming, considerable publicity was given to health-conscious Gloria Swanson's youthful appearance, which did not contrast enough with William Holden's mature looks. Wilder insisted that the age difference be delineated, and instructed makeup supervisor Wally Westmore to make Swanson look older. Swanson argued that a woman of Norma Desmond's age, with her considerable wealth and devotion to self, would not necessarily look old, and suggested Holden be made up to appear younger. Wilder agreed, and Westmore was assigned this task, which allowed Swanson to portray Norma Desmond as more glamorous a figure than Wilder had originally imagined.[12]In dissecting Hollywood's "world of illusion," Wilder carefully placed the story within as authentic a setting as possible and made use of Hollywood history. Norma Desmond's name is believed to have been inspired by actor/director William Desmond Taylor, who was murdered in 1922, and his close associate and friend Mabel Normand, whose career was marked by scandals surrounding the murder.[12]Swanson was considered a fitting representative of Hollywood's past, remembered nostalgically by older fans but unknown to many younger movie viewers. Her personal collection of photographs decorated the set of Norma Desmond's home, causing Desmond's fictional past to resemble Swanson's authentic career.[12]The script/film refers to real films such as Gone with the Wind and real people such as Darryl F. Zanuck, D. W. Griffith, Rudolph Valentino, Douglas Fairbanks, John Gilbert, Tyrone Power, Alan Ladd, William Demarest, Adolphe Menjou, Rod La Rocque, Vilma Bnky, Mabel Normand, Bebe Daniels, Marie Prevost, Betty Hutton, Pearl White and Barbara Stanwyck along with the Black Dahlia murder case. Norma Desmond declares admiration for Greta Garbo.[2]Wilder extended his Hollywood references into some of his casting choices. Erich von Stroheim was a leading director of the silent era. In the role of Max, he watches a film with Norma Desmond, and the briefly shown scene is from Queen Kelly (1929), which von Stroheim himself directed with Swanson in the title role. Cecil B. De Mille, often credited as the person most responsible for making Swanson a star, plays himself, and was filmed on the set of his current film Samson and Delilah at Paramount Studios. He calls Norma "young fella," as he had called Swanson, a tiny detail of authenticity suggested by De Mille.Norma's friends who come to play bridge with her, described in the script as "the waxworks", are Swanson's contemporaries Buster Keaton, Anna Q. Nilsson and H. B. Warner, who, like De Mille, play themselves. Hedda Hopper also plays herself, reporting on Norma Desmond's downfall in the film's final scenes.[12] (Coincidentally, both Keaton and Hopper would die on February 1, 1966.)In a comic scene, Norma Desmond performs a pantomime for Joe Gillis as a Mack Sennett Bathing Beauty, in homage to Swanson's earliest film roles. She also performs a Charlie Chaplin impersonation identical to one she performed in the film Manhandled (1924).The bed in the shape of a swan that Norma Desmond slept in was actually owned by the dancer Gaby Deslys, who died in 1920. It had originally been bought by the Universal prop department at auction after Deslys's death. The bed appeared in The Phantom of the Opera (1925) starring Lon Chaney.Wilder also made use of authentic locales. Joe Gillis's home in the Alto Nido apartments was a real apartment block in central Hollywood and was often populated by struggling writers. The scenes of Gillis and Betty Schaefer on Paramount's backlot were filmed on the actual backlot, and the interior of Schwab's Drug Store was carefully recreated for several scenes. The exterior scenes of the Desmond house were filmed near an old house on Wilshire Blvd. built during the 1920s, which by 1949 was owned by the former wife of J.Paul Getty. The house was also featured five years later in Nicholas Ray's Rebel Without a Cause. It was later demolished, and an office building now stands in its place. [18]Wilder and Brackett were nervous about a major screening in Hollywood, and decided to have the preview in Evanston, Illinois. The original edit opened with a scene inside a morgue, with the assembled corpses discussing how they came to be there. The story began with the corpse of Joe Gillis recounting his murder to the others. The audience reacted with laughter and seemed unsure whether to view the rest of the film as drama or comedy. After a similar reaction during its second screening, the opening scene was deleted. The new edit was well received in Poughkeepsie, New York.In Hollywood, Paramount arranged a private screening for the various studio heads and specially invited guests. After viewing the film, Barbara Stanwyck knelt to kiss the hem of Gloria Swanson's skirt. Swanson later remembered looking for Mary Pickford, only to be told, "She can't show herself, Gloria. She's too overcome. We all are." Louis B. Mayer berated Wilder before the crowd of celebrities, saying, "You have disgraced the industry that made and fed you! You should be tarred and feathered and run out of Hollywood!" Actress Mae Murray, a contemporary of Swanson's, was offended by the film and commented, "None of us floozies was that nuts."[12]Wilder's reply to Mayer's response after the Hollywood screening was both insulting and abrupt. Upon hearing of Mayer's slight, Billy in characteristic fashion strode up to the mogul and said: "I am Mr. Wilder, and go fuck yourself!" Another citation lists that he also said: "Go shit in your hat!" The severity of the response was due to the notion that Mayer brought up the fact that Wilder was Jewish and that he would be better off being sent back to Germany. A statement of such a nature so soon after the war gave additional depth to Mayer's statement. That comment didn't get by Wilder."[19][20]Sunset Boulevard attracted a range of positive reviews from critics. Time described it as a story of "Hollywood at its worst told by Hollywood at its best",[21] while Boxoffice Review wrote "the picture will keep spectators spellbound."[22] James Agee, writing for Sight and Sound, praised the film and said Wilder and Brackett were "beautifully equipped to do the cold, exact, adroit, sardonic job they have done." Good Housekeeping described Swanson as a "great lady [who] spans another decade with her magic,"[12] while Look praised her "brilliant and haunting performance."[21]Some critics accurately foresaw the film's lasting appeal. The Hollywood Reporter wrote that future generations would "set themselves the task of analyzing the durability and greatness" of the film, while Commonweal said that in the future "the Library of Congress will be glad to have in its archives a print of Sunset Boulevard."[12]The rare negative comments included those from The New Yorker, which described the film as "a pretentious slice of Roquefort," containing only "the germ of a good idea."[12] Thomas M. Pryor wrote for the New York Times that the plot device of using the dead Joe Gillis as narrator was "completely unworthy of Brackett and Wilder, but happily it does not interfere with the success of Sunset Boulevard."[23]After a seven-week run at Radio City Music Hall, Variety magazine reported the film had grossed "around $1,020,000", making it one of that cinema's most successful pictures. Variety also noted that, while it was "breaking records in major cities, it is doing below average in ... the sticks." To promote the film, Gloria Swanson traveled by train throughout the United States, visiting 33 cities in a few months. The publicity helped attract people to the cinemas, but in many provincial areas it was considered less than a hit.[12]Sunset Boulevard received 11 Academy Award nominations and won three Academy Awards.[24]Sunset Boulevard's eleven nominations were exceeded only by the fourteen received by All About Eve, which won six awards, including Best Picture and Best Director. Many critics predicted that the Best Actress award would be given to Gloria Swanson or Bette Davis for All About Eve and were surprised that the recipient was newcomer Judy Holliday for Born Yesterday. Swanson recalled the press' reaction following Holliday's win: "It slowly dawned on me that they were asking for a larger-than-life scene, or better still, a mad scene. More accurately, they were trying to flush out Norma Desmond."[21]In an interview years later, Davis bluntly stated that she and Swanson had "cancelled each other out,"[25] though in 1982 she told Playboy of her admiration for Swanson's performance, saying, "If she'd won, I'd have shouted hooray. She was sensational, just fantastic."[26]Sunset Boulevard also received Golden Globe awards for Best Motion Picture  Drama, Best Motion Picture Actress (Swanson), Best Motion Picture Director and Best Motion Picture Score. Wilder and Brackett won a Writers Guild of America, East Award for Best Written American Drama, while the Directors Guild of America nominated Wilder for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures. The National Board of Review voted it Best Picture, and Swanson received Best Actress.American Film Institute recognitionThe film earned an estimated $2,350,000 at the U.S. box office in 1950.[27]Sunset Boulevard was the last collaboration between Wilder and Brackett. They parted amicably and respected their long-term partnership by not airing any grievance publicly. Their mutual respect and courteous integrity remained in force throughout the rest of their lives. In later years, Brackett confided in screenwriter/director Garson Kanin that he had not anticipated the split, or had ever understood exactly what happened or why. He described it as "an unexpected blow" from which he never recovered fully. When asked to respond to Brackett's comments, Wilder remained silent.[28]The two men briefly reunited in October 1951 to face charges they had plagiarized Sunset Boulevard. Former Paramount accountant Stephanie Joan Carlson alleged that in 1947 she had submitted to Wilder and Brackett, at their request, manuscripts of stories, both fictional and based on fact, she had written about studio life. She claimed that one in particular, Past Performance, served as the basis for the Sunset script, and sued the screenwriters and Paramount for $100,000 in general damages, $250,000 in punitive damages, $700,000 based on the box office returns, and an additional $350,000 for good measure, for a total of $1,400,000. Carlson's suit was dismissed after two and a half years. In 1954, a similar suit was filed by playwright Edra Buckler, who claimed material she had written had been the screenplay's source. Her suit was dismissed the following year.[29]Brackett's Hollywood career continued after his split with Wilder. He won an Academy Award for his screenplay for Titanic (1953), and wrote Niagara (1953), the breakthrough film for Marilyn Monroe as a dramatic actress. It was Wilder, however, who realized Monroe's comedic abilities in The Seven Year Itch and Some Like it Hot. Brackett's career waned by the end of the decade.William Holden began receiving more important parts and his career rose. In 1953, he won the Best Actor Oscar for Stalag 17, also directed by Wilder, and by 1956 he was the top box-office attraction in the United States.Nancy Olson's pairing with William Holden was considered a success, and she appeared opposite him in several films during the 1950s, although none of them repeated their earlier success. She went on to star in The Absent-Minded Professor (1960) and Son of Flubber (1961), in which she was paired with Fred MacMurray, but despite the films' popularity with movie-goers, her career stalled.Similarly, Gloria Swanson was not able to leverage her own success in Sunset Boulevard. Although offered scripts, she felt that they all were poor imitations of Norma Desmond. Imagining a career that would eventually reduce her to playing "a parody of a parody," she virtually retired from films.[4]Sunset Boulevard was shown in New York City in 1960, and drew such a positive response that Paramount arranged for a limited rerelease in theaters throughout the United States. It is arguably best known to modern audiences as a result of its television screenings since the 1960s.[4]In 1989, the film was among the first group of 25 deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.[30]Polls conducted by the American Film Institute have demonstrated the lasting appeal of Sunset Boulevard and the esteem in which it is held by the modern filmmakers who respond to these polls. In 1998, it was ranked number twelve on a list of "100 Greatest Films".[31] In 2004, two quotes from Sunset Boulevard were included in their poll of "Greatest Movie Quotes": "All right, Mr. De Mille, I'm ready for my close-up" and "I am big, it's the pictures that got small!" at #7 and #24 respectively.[32] In 2005, Franz Waxman's score was named #16 of the top 25 film scores in the AFI's "100 Years of Film Scores" list.[33]Roger Ebert has praised the acting of Holden and von Stroheim and has described Swanson's as "one of the all time greatest performances." He says Sunset Boulevard "remains the best drama ever made about the movies because it sees through the illusions."[34] Pauline Kael described the film as "almost too clever, but at its best in its cleverness,"[35] and also wrote that it was common to "hear Billy Wilder called the world's greatest director."[36] When Wilder died, obituaries singled out Sunset Boulevard for comment, describing it as one of his most significant works along with Double Indemnity (1944) and Some Like it Hot (1959).[37]By the late 1990s, most Sunset Boulevard prints were in poor condition, and since the film was one of the last to be filmed on cellulose nitrate filmstock, much of the original negative had perished. Paramount Studios, believing the film merited the effort of a complete restoration, mounted an expensive project to have it digitally restored. The restored version was released on DVD in 2002.[38] A 2003 BBC review of the restored film described it as "the finest movie ever made about the narcissistic hellhole that is Hollywood."[10]While Hollywood had been making films about itself since the 1920s, many of them, such as It's a Great Feeling (1949), were good-natured and fun. Others, such as What Price Hollywood? (1932) and A Star Is Born (1937), hinted at the darker side of Hollywood without explicitly showing it. Sunset Boulevard is considered[by whom?] to be the first to employ such extreme cynicism. It was soon followed by The Bad and the Beautiful (1952), Singin' in the Rain (1952) and the musical remake of A Star Is Born (1954). Though none was as harshly self-critical, each depicted the ease and cruelty with which Hollywood could discard a movie star past his or her prime.Sunset Boulevard was followed by other films which varied the story of an older actress desperately clinging to her past glory, such as Bette Davis in The Star (1952) and What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1962), Joan Crawford in Torch Song (1953), Geraldine Page in Sweet Bird of Youth (1962), Susan Hayward in Valley of the Dolls (1967) and Faye Dunaway in Mommie Dearest (1981). The scenario of an older woman with a gigolo was also used without the Hollywood setting in such films as Senso (1954) with Alida Valli and Farley Granger and The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone (1961), which starred Vivien Leigh and Warren Beatty, while Katharine Hepburn's descent into madness in Suddenly, Last Summer (1959) has been compared[by whom?] to Norma Desmond's final scene. The Day of the Locust (1975), The Last Tycoon (1976), and S.O.B. with Julie Andrews (1981) depict Hollywood in bitter terms and, like Sunset Boulevard, make use of real backstage settings. Rainer Fassbinder's 1982 film Die Sehnsucht der Veronika Voss, this time set in the post-war German film industry, was heavily influenced by Sunset Boulevard, detailing a tragic love affair of a doomed faded movie star and a younger reporter.Among the more recent films to discuss Sunset Boulevard in their screenplays or imitate its scenes or dialogue are Soapdish (1991), The Player (1992), Gods and Monsters (1998), Mulholland Drive (2001),[12] Inland Empire (2006) and Be Cool (2005). The ending of Cecil B. Demented (2000) is a parody of Sunset Boulevard's final scene.There have been several attempts to make a musical out of Sunset Boulevard.From around 1952 to 1956, Gloria Swanson herself worked with actor Richard Stapley (aka Richard Wyler) and cabaret singer/pianist Dickson Hughes on an adaptation titled Boulevard! (at first Starring Norma Desmond). Stapley and Hughes first approached Swanson about appearing in a musical revue they had written, About Time (based on Time). Swanson stated that she would return to the stage only in a musical version of her comeback film. Within a week, Stapley and Dickson had written three songs which Swanson approved.[40]In this version, the romance between Gillis and Schaefer was allowed to blossom, and rather than shoot Gillis at the end, Norma gave the couple her blessing, sending them on their way to live "happily ever after."Although Paramount gave verbal permission to proceed with the musical, there was no formal legal option. In the late 1950s, Paramount withdrew its consent, leading to the demise of the project.In 1994, Dickson Hughes incorporated material from Boulevard! into a musical Swanson on Sunset, based on his and Stapley's experiences in writing Boulevard!.Around 1980, Stephen Sondheim and Hal Prince were working on a musical adaptation with Norma to be played by Angela Lansbury.[41]Sondheim gave up the venture after meeting Billy Wilder, who proposed he write an opera instead of a musical. John Kander and Fred Ebb were asked to write it.[citation needed] Finally Andrew Lloyd Webber took the opportunity to create a musical.A musical titled Sunset Boulevard with music by Andrew Lloyd Webber and book and lyrics by Don Black and Christopher Hampton was performed at the 1992 Sydmonton Festival, before opening in London the following year. It closely followed the film story, retained much of the dialogue and attempted to present similar set designs.The title of the film is commonly spelled Sunset Boulevard, as it was for the film's original theatrical trailer and the National Film Registry. However, since the film opens with a shot of a street curb which has a stencil of Sunset Blvd in capital letters (instead of a title sequence), the title is sometimes spelled "Sunset Blvd.", for instance by Leonard Maltin's Film Guide, the IMDb, and the registration with the Library of Congress.[citation needed]Sunset Boulevard was dramatized as an hour-long radio play on the September 17, 1951 broadcast of Lux Radio Theater with Gloria Swanson and William Holden in their original film roles.[42]August 4, 1950(1950-08-04)1 Plot2 Background3 Casting

3.1 Main cast
3.2 Cast selection

3.1 Main cast3.2 Cast selection4 Writing5 Score6 Key creative personnel7 Touches of authenticity8 Critical reception9 23rd Academy Awards (Oscars) 195010 Aftermath11 Stature12 Other films about Hollywood

12.1 Television

12.1 Television13 Musical versions

13.1 Stapley and Hughes
13.2 Other failed attempts
13.3 Lloyd Webber and Black & Hampton

13.1 Stapley and Hughes13.2 Other failed attempts13.3 Lloyd Webber and Black & Hampton14 Title15 Adaptations to other media16 Notes17 References18 External links3.1 Main cast3.2 Cast selection12.1 Television13.1 Stapley and Hughes13.2 Other failed attempts13.3 Lloyd Webber and Black & Hampton1998  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  #122003  AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains

Norma Desmond - Nominated Villain

Norma Desmond - Nominated Villain2005  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"All right, Mr. DeMille, I'm ready for my close-up."  #7
"I am big, it's the pictures that got small!"  #24

"All right, Mr. DeMille, I'm ready for my close-up."  #7"I am big, it's the pictures that got small!"  #242005  AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  #162007  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #16Norma Desmond - Nominated Villain"All right, Mr. DeMille, I'm ready for my close-up."  #7"I am big, it's the pictures that got small!"  #24The film inspired a 1959 episode of The Twilight Zone titled "The Sixteen-Millimeter Shrine", in which an aging movie queen, played by Ida Lupino, relives her past glory through watching her movies and at the same time isolating herself from the real world.[39]The season five premiere of Columbo, titled "Forgotten Lady", also drew heavily from Sunset Boulevard with its storyline of a former star involved in a murder in the midst of a vain attempt at a comeback which her husband, a physician and the murder victim, would not permit because she had a terminal condition that was destroying her memory and would kill her if she continued her attempt at a comeback. This time, the role of the aging diva was played by Janet Leigh.[citation needed]On The Carol Burnett Show, Carol Burnett parodied the Norma Desmond character with a recurring sketch about a deranged movie star named "Nora Desmond" and her faithful butler Max.[citation needed]On an episode of Tiny Toon Adventures, Sepulveda Boulevard, the characters and story are parodied by some of the Tiny Toon characters.[citation needed]American Dad! Episode "Star Trek", opens with a similar scene to Sunset Boulevard, with Steve floating face down in a pool of jello.Corliss, Richard (1974). Talking Pictures: Screenwriters in the American Cinema, 1927-1973. Overlook Press. ISBN 0-87951-007-2Hadleigh, Boze (1996). Bette Davis Speaks. Barricade Books. ISBN 1-56980-066-9.Kael, Pauline (1982). 5001 Nights at the Movies. Zenith Books. ISBN 0-09-933550-6.Kirgo, Julie (1979). "Sunset Boulevard". In Alain Silver and Elizabeth Ward, eds, Film noir: An encyclopedic reference to the American style. Woodstock: Overlook Press, 1979. ISBN 0-87951-055-2.Perry, George & Andrew Lloyd Weber (1993). Sunset Boulevard, From Movie to Musical. Pavilion. ISBN 1-85793-208-0.Sikov, Ed (1998). On Sunset Boulevard: The Life and Times of Billy Wilder. New York: Hyperion. ISBN 0-7868-6194-0.Staggs, Sam (2001). All About "All About Eve". St Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-27315-0.Staggs, Sam (2002). Close-up on Sunset Boulevard: Billy Wilder, Norma Desmond, and the Dark Hollywood Dream. New York St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-27453-X.Swanson, Gloria (1981). Swanson on Swanson, The Making of a Hollywood Legend. Hamlyn. ISBN 0-600-20496-0.Wiley, Mason and Damien Bona (1987). Inside Oscar, The Unofficial History of the Academy Awards. Ballantine Books. ISBN 0-345-34453-7. Media related to Sunset Blvd. (1950 film) at Wikimedia CommonsSunset Boulevard at the Internet Movie DatabaseSunset Boulevard at AllRoviSunset Boulevard at Rotten TomatoesSunset Boulevard on Lux Radio Theater: September 17, 1951The Bridge on the River Kwai is a 1957 British World War II film by David Lean based on The Bridge over the River Kwai by French writer Pierre Boulle. The film is a work of fiction but borrows the construction of the Burma Railway in 194243 for its historical setting. It stars William Holden, Jack Hawkins, Alec Guinness and Sessue Hayakawa. The film was filmed in Ceylon (now Sri Lanka). The bridge in the film was located near Kitulgala.The film achieved near universal critical acclaim, winning seven Academy Awards (including Best Picture) at the 30th Academy Awards, and in 1997, this film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and selected for preservation in the United States Library of Congress National Film Registry. It is widely considered to be one of the greatest films of all time.After the surrender of Singapore in World War II, a unit of British soldiers is marched to a Japanese prison camp in western Thailand. They are paraded before the camp commandant, Colonel Saito (Sessue Hayakawa), who informs them of his rules; all prisoners, regardless of rank, are to work on the construction of a bridge over the River Kwai to carry a new railway line to invade Burma.Their commander, Lt. Colonel Nicholson (Alec Guinness), reminds Saito that the Geneva Conventions exempt officers from manual labour. At the following mornings parade, Nicholson orders his officers to remain behind when the enlisted men head off to work. Saito slaps him hard across the face with his copy of the conventions and threatens to have them shot, but Nicholson refuses to back down. When Major Clipton (James Donald), the British medical officer, intervenes, Saito leaves the officers standing all day in the intense tropical heat. That evening, the officers are placed in a punishment hut, while Nicholson is locked in the oven, an iron box, without food or water.Clipton attempts to secure Nicholson's release, but Nicholson refuses to compromise. Meanwhile, the prisoners are working as little as possible and sabotaging whatever they can. Saito is concerned because, should he fail to meet his deadline, he would be obliged to commit seppuku (ritual suicide). Using the anniversary of Japan's great victory in the 1905 Russo-Japanese War as an excuse to save face, he gives in, and Nicholson and his officers are released.Nicholson conducts an inspection and is shocked by what he finds. Against the protests of some of his officers, he orders Captain Reeves (Peter Williams) and Major Hughes (John Boxer) to design and build a proper bridge, despite its military value to the Japanese, for the sake of his men's morale. The Japanese engineers had chosen a poor site, so the original construction is abandoned and a new bridge is begun 400 yards downstream.Meanwhile, three prisoners attempt to escape. Two are shot dead, but United States Navy Commander Shears (William Holden), gets away, although badly wounded. After many days, Shears eventually stumbles into a village, whose people help him to escape by a boat.Shears is enjoying his recovery at the Mount Lavinia Hospital at Ceylon (with a British nurse), when Major Warden (Jack Hawkins) asks him to volunteer for a commando mission to destroy the bridge. Shears is horrified at the idea and reveals that he is not an officer at all. He was an enlisted man on the cruiser USS Houston. He switched uniforms with the dead Commander Shears after the sinking of their ship to get better treatment. Warden already knows this and has had "Shears" reassigned to British duty. Faced with the prospect of being charged with impersonating an officer, Shears has no choice but to volunteer; Warden gives him the "simulated rank of major".Meanwhile, Nicholson drives his men, even volunteering to have them work harder to complete the bridge on time. For Nicholson, its completion will exemplify the ingenuity and hard work of the British Army for generations. When he asks that their Japanese counterparts join in as well, a resigned Saito replies that he has already given the order.The commandos parachute in, although one is killed in a bad landing. The other threeWarden, Shears, and Canadian Lieutenant Joyce (Geoffrey Horne)reach the river with the assistance of Siamese women porters and their village chief, Khun Yai. Warden is wounded in an encounter with a Japanese patrol, and has to be carried on a litter. The trio reach the bridge in time and plant explosives underwater under cover of darkness.A train carrying soldiers and important dignitaries is scheduled to be the first to use the bridge the following afternoon, so Warden plans to destroy both at the same time. However, by dawn the water level has dropped, exposing the wire connecting the explosives to the detonator. Making a final inspection, Nicholson spots the wire and brings it to Saito's attention to the consternation of the commando team. As the train is heard approaching, Nicholson, with Saito in tow, hurries down to the riverbank to investigate. Joyce, hiding with the detonator, breaks cover and stabs Saito to death; Nicholson yells for help, while attempting to stop Joyce from reaching the detonator. Shears and Warden yell for Joyce to kill Nicholson, but Joyce is shot by Japanese fire. Shears then swims across the river to fulfill the mission, but is shot just before he reaches Nicholson.Recognising the dying Shears, Nicholson exclaims: "What have I done?" Warden fires his mortar, mortally wounding Nicholson. The dazed colonel stumbles towards the detonator and falls on it as he dies, just in time to blow up the bridge and send the train hurtling into the river below. As he witnesses the carnage, Clipton shakes his head uttering: "Madness!... Madness!"The largely fictional film plot is loosely based on the building in 1943 of one of the railway bridges over the Mae Klongrenamed Khwae Yai in the 1960sat a place called Tha Ma Kham, five kilometres from the Thai town of Kanchanaburi.According to the Commonwealth War Graves Commission:"The notorious Burma-Siam railway, built by Commonwealth, Dutch and American prisoners of war, was a Japanese project driven by the need for improved communications to support the large Japanese army in Burma. During its construction, approximately 13,000 prisoners of war died and were buried along the railway. An estimated 80,000 to 100,000 civilians also died in the course of the project, chiefly forced labour brought from Malaya and the Dutch East Indies, or conscripted in Siam (Thailand) and Burma. Two labour forces, one based in Siam and the other in Burma worked from opposite ends of the line towards the centre."[1]The incidents portrayed in the film are mostly fictional, and though it depicts bad conditions and suffering caused by the building of the Burma Railway and its bridges, historically the conditions were much worse than depicted.[2] The real senior Allied officer at the bridge was British Lieutenant Colonel Philip Toosey. Some consider the film to be an insulting parody of Toosey.[3] On a BBC Timewatch programme, a former prisoner at the camp states that it is unlikely that a man like the fictional Nicholson could have risen to the rank of lieutenant colonel; and if he had, due to his collaboration he would have been "quietly eliminated" by the other prisoners. Julie Summers, in her book The Colonel of Tamarkan, writes that Pierre Boulle, who had been a prisoner of war in Thailand, created the fictional Nicholson character as an amalgam of his memories of collaborating French officers.[3] He strongly denied the claim that the book was anti-British, though many involved in the film itself (including Alec Guinness) felt otherwise.[4]Toosey was very different from Nicholson and was certainly not a collaborator who felt obliged to work with the Japanese. Toosey in fact did as much to delay the building of the bridge as possible. Whereas Nicholson disapproves of acts of sabotage and other deliberate attempts to delay progress, Toosey encouraged this: termites were collected in large numbers to eat the wooden structures, and the concrete was badly mixed.[3][5]Some of the characters in the film have the names of real people who were involved in the Burma Railway. Their roles and characters, however, are fictionalised. For example, a Sergeant-Major Risaburo Saito was in real life second in command at the camp. In the film, a Colonel Saito is camp commandant. In reality, Risaburo Saito was respected by his prisoners for being comparatively merciful and fair towards them; Toosey later defended him in his war crimes trial after the war, and the two became friends.The destruction of the bridge as depicted in the film is entirely fictional. In fact, two bridges were built: a temporary wooden bridge and a permanent steel/concrete bridge a few months later. Both bridges were used for two years, until they were destroyed by Allied aerial bombing. The steel bridge was repaired and is still in use today.The screenwriters, Carl Foreman and Michael Wilson, were on the Hollywood blacklist and could only work on the film in secret. The two did not collaborate on the script; Wilson took over after Lean was dissatisfied with Foreman's work. The official credit was given to Pierre Boulle (who did not speak English), and the resulting Oscar for Best Screenplay (Adaptation) was awarded to him. Only in 1984 did the Academy rectify the situation by retroactively awarding the Oscar to Foreman and Wilson, posthumously in both cases. Subsequent releases of the film finally gave them proper screen credit.The film was relatively faithful to the novel, with two major exceptions. Shears, who is a British commando officer like Warden in the novel, became an American sailor who escapes from the POW camp. Also, in the novel, the bridge is not destroyed: the train plummets into the river from a secondary charge placed by Warden, but Nicholson (never realizing "what have I done?") does not fall onto the plunger, and the bridge suffers only minor damage. Boulle nonetheless enjoyed the film version though he disagreed with its climax.Many directors were considered for the project, among them John Ford, William Wyler, Howard Hawks, Fred Zinnemann and Orson Welles.[citation needed]The film was an international co-production between companies in Britain and the United States. It is set in Thailand, but was filmed mostly near Kitulgala, Ceylon (now Sri Lanka), with a few scenes shot in England.Lean clashed with his cast members on multiple occasions, particularly Alec Guinness and James Donald, who thought the novel was anti-British. Lean had a lengthy row with Guinness over how to play the role of Nicholson; Guinness wanted to play the part with a sense of humour and sympathy, while Lean thought Nicholson should be "a bore." On another occasion, Lean and Guinness argued over the scene where Nicholson reflects on his career in the army. Lean filmed the scene from behind Guinness, and exploded in anger when Guinness asked him why he was doing this. After Guinness was done with the scene, Lean said "Now you can all fuck off and go home, you English actors. Thank God that I'm starting work tomorrow with an American actor (William Holden)."[6]Alec Guinness later said that he subconsciously based his walk while emerging from "the Oven" on that of his son Matthew when he was recovering from polio. He called his walk from the Oven to Saito's hut while being saluted by his men the "finest work I'd ever done."[citation needed]Lean nearly drowned when he was swept away by a river current during a break from filming; Geoffrey Horne saved his life.[citation needed]The filming of the bridge explosion was to be done on 10 March 1957, in the presence of S.W.R.D. Bandaranaike, then Prime Minister of Ceylon, and a team of government dignitaries. However, cameraman Freddy Ford was unable to get out of the way of the explosion in time, and Lean had to stop filming. The train crashed into a generator on the other side of the bridge and was wrecked. It was repaired in time to be blown up the next morning, with Bandaranaike and his entourage present.[citation needed]According to the supplemental material in the Blu-ray digipak, a thousand tons of explosives were used to blow up the bridge. This is highly unlikely, as the film shows roughly 50kg of plastique being used simply to knock down the bridge's supports.According to Turner Classic Movies, the producers nearly suffered a catastrophe following the filming of the bridge explosion. To ensure they captured the one-time event, multiple cameras from several angles were used. Ordinarily, the film would have been taken by boat to London, but due to the Suez crisis this was impossible; therefore the film was taken by air freight. When the shipment failed to arrive in London, a worldwide search was undertaken. To the producers' horror the film containers were found a week later on an airport tarmac in Cairo, sitting in the hot Egyptian sun. Though it was not exposed to sunlight, the heat-sensitive colour film stock should have been hopelessly ruined; however, when processed the shots were perfect and appeared in the film.A memorable feature of the film is the tune that is whistled by the POWsthe first strain of the march "Colonel Bogey"when they enter the camp.[7] The march was originally written in 1914 by Kenneth J. Alford, a pseudonym of British Bandmaster Frederick J. Ricketts. The Colonel Bogey strain was accompanied by a counter-melody using the same chord progressions, then continued with film composer Malcolm Arnold's own composition "The River Kwai March," played by the off-screen orchestra taking over from the whistlers, though Arnold's march was not heard in completion on the soundtrack. Mitch Miller had a hit with a recording of both marches.Besides serving as an example of British fortitude and dignity in the face of privation, the "Colonel Bogey March" suggested a specific symbol of defiance to British film-goers, as its melody was used for the song "Hitler Has Only Got One Ball." Lean wanted to introduce Nicholson and his soldiers into the camp singing this song, but Sam Spiegel thought it too vulgar, and so whistling was substituted. However, the lyrics were, and continue to be, so well known to the British public that they didn't need to be laboured.The soundtrack of the film is largely diegetic; background music is not widely used. In many tense, dramatic scenes, only the sounds of nature are used. An example of this is when commandos Warden and Joyce hunt a fleeing Japanese soldier through the jungle, desperate to prevent him from alerting other troops.Arnold won an Academy Award for the film's score.Lean later used another Allford march, "The Voice of the Guns," in Lawrence of Arabia.Variety reported that this film was the #1 moneymaker of 1958, with a US take of $18,000,000.[8] The second highest moneymaker of 1958 was Peyton Place at $12,000,000; in third place was Sayonara at $10,500,000.[8]The Bridge on the River Kwai won seven Oscars:It was nominated forWinner of 3 BAFTA AwardsWinner of 3 Golden GlobesRecipient of one nominationThe film has been selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.British TV channel Channel 4 held a poll to find the 100 Greatest War Movies in 2005. The Bridge on the River Kwai came in at #10, behind Black Hawk Down and in front of The Dam Busters.The British Film Institute placed The Bridge on the River Kwai as the eleventh greatest British film.The film was first telecast, uncut, by ABC-TV in color on the evening of September 25, 1966, as a three hours-plus special on The ABC Sunday Night Movie. The telecast of the film lasted more than three hours because of the commercial breaks. It was still highly unusual at that time for a television network to show such a long film in one evening; most films of that length were still generally split into two parts and shown over two evenings. But the unusual move paid off for ABCthe telecast drew huge ratings.[9] On the evenings of January 28 and 29, 1973, ABC telecast another David Lean color spectacular, Lawrence of Arabia, but that telecast was split into two parts over two evenings.[10]The film was restored in 1985 by Sony Pictures Entertainment. The separate dialogue, music and effects were located and remixed with newly recorded "atmospheric" sound effects.[11] The image was restored by OCS, Freeze Frame, and Pixel Magic with George Hively editing.[12]On November 2, 2010 Columbia Pictures released a newly restored The Bridge on the River Kwai for the first time on Blu-ray. According to Columbia Pictures, they followed an all-new 4K digital restoration from the original negative with newly restored 5.1 audio.[13] The Original Negative for the feature was scanned at 4k (roughly four times the amount of resolution in High Definition), and the color correction and digital restoration were also completed at 4k. The negative itself manifested many of the kinds of issues one would expect from a film of this vintage: torn frames, imbedded emulsion dirt, scratches through every reel, color fading. Unique to this film, in some ways, were other issues related to poorly made optical dissolves, the original camera lens and a malfunctioning camera. These problems resulted in a number of anomalies that were very difficult to correct, like a ghosting effect in many scenes that resembles color mis-registration, and a tick-like effect with the image jumping or jerking side-to-side. These issues, running throughout the film, were addressed to a lesser extent on various previous DVD releases of the film and might not have been so obvious in standard definition.[14]Coordinates: 140227N 993011E / 14.04083N 99.50306E / 14.04083; 99.503062 October 1957(1957-10-02)1 Plot2 Cast3 Historical parallels4 Production

4.1 Screenplay
4.2 Filming
4.3 Music

4.1 Screenplay4.2 Filming4.3 Music5 Box office performance6 Awards

6.1 Academy Awards
6.2 BAFTA Awards
6.3 Golden Globe Awards
6.4 Other awards
6.5 Other nominations
6.6 Recognition

6.6.1 American Film Institute recognition



6.1 Academy Awards6.2 BAFTA Awards6.3 Golden Globe Awards6.4 Other awards6.5 Other nominations6.6 Recognition

6.6.1 American Film Institute recognition

6.6.1 American Film Institute recognition7 First telecast8 Restorations9 In popular culture

9.1 Parodies

9.1 Parodies10 See also11 References12 External links4.1 Screenplay4.2 Filming4.3 Music6.1 Academy Awards6.2 BAFTA Awards6.3 Golden Globe Awards6.4 Other awards6.5 Other nominations6.6 Recognition

6.6.1 American Film Institute recognition

6.6.1 American Film Institute recognition6.6.1 American Film Institute recognition9.1 ParodiesWilliam Holden as US Navy Commander/Seaman ShearsAlec Guinness as Lieutenant Colonel NicholsonJack Hawkins as Major WardenSessue Hayakawa as Colonel SaitoJames Donald as Major CliptonGeoffrey Horne as Lieutenant JoyceAndr Morell as Colonel HornsbyPeter Williams as Captain ReevesJohn Boxer as Major HughesPercy Herbert as Private GroganHarold Goodwin as Private BakerAnn Sears as nurseBest Picture  Sam SpiegelBest Director  David LeanBest Actor  Alec GuinnessBest Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium  Michael Wilson, Carl Foreman, Pierre BoulleBest Music, Scoring of a Dramatic or Comedy Film  Malcolm ArnoldBest Film Editing  Peter TaylorBest Cinematography  Jack HildyardBest Actor in a Supporting Role  Sessue HayakawaBest British Film  David Lean, Sam SpiegelBest Film from any Source  David Lean, Sam SpiegelBest British Actor  Alec GuinnessBest Motion Picture  Drama  David Lean, Sam SpiegelBest Director  David LeanGolden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Drama  Alec GuinnessBest Supporting Actor  Sessue HayakawaNew York Film Critics Circle Awards for Best FilmDirectors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures (David Lean, Assistants: Gus Agosti & Ted Sturgis)New York Film Critics Circle Awards for Best Director (David Lean)New York Film Critics Circle Awards for Best Actor (Alec Guinness)Grammy Award for Best Soundtrack Album, Dramatic Picture Score or Original Cast (Malcolm Arnold)1998  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  #132001  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills  #582005  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes

"Madness. Madness"  Nominated

"Madness. Madness"  Nominated2006  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers  #142007  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #36"Madness. Madness"  NominatedBalu Mahendra, famous Tamil film director saw the shooting of this film at Kitulgala, Sri Lanka during his school trip and got inspired to become a film director.[15]One of the main characters in the movie Dr. Strangelove, Captain Mandrake, portrayed by Peter Sellers makes a brief reference to the events of The Bridge on the River Kwai, as if he were present. When General D. Ripper asks him if he was ever in captivity, he tells that he was captured by the Japanese and forced to build a bridge in Thailand, while he was regularly beaten and tortured for no reason.Actor Tom Selleck has a continuing association with Kwai, first in several episodes of Magnum, P.I. in which the character Higgens was a POW who worked on the bridge in WWII, and then two decades later when Tom (as Jesse Stone) watches the end of the film on TV in Innocents Lost, (which Selleck co-wrote).In the video game Call of Duty: World at War, the multiplayer map Banzai features a bridge that has astonisihing similarities to the bridge that appears in this film. In addition, the console codename for the map is "mp_kwai".[16]In 1962 Spike Milligan and Peter Sellers, with Peter Cook and Jonathan Miller, released the LP record Bridge On The River Wye (Parlophone LP PMC 1190,PCS 3036 (November 1962)). This spoof of the film was based on the script for the 1957 Goon Show episode "An African Incident". Shortly before its release, for legal reasons, producer George Martin edited out the 'K' every time the word 'Kwai' was spoken.[17]The comedy team of Wayne and Shuster performed a sketch titled "Kwai Me a River" on their March 27, 1967 TV show, in which an officer in the British Dental Corps is captured by the Japanese and forced to build the commander of the POW camp a (dental) 'bridge on the river Kwai'.[18]Episode 23 of Monty Python's Flying Circus features "Bridge Over the River Trent".The 1985 film Volunteers, featuring Tom Hanks and John Candy, was a spoof of this film.BFI Top 100 British filmsList of historical drama filmsList of historical drama films of AsiaTo End All Wars (film)Return from the River Kwai (1989 film)The Bridge on the River Kwai at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Bridge on the River Kwai at the British Film Institute's ScreenonlineThe Bridge on the River Kwai at AllRoviThe Bridge on the River Kwai at Box Office MojoThe Bridge on the River Kwai at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Bridge on the River Kwai at Rotten TomatoesAccount of bombing crewThe Prisoner List. Short online film about prisoners of the Japanese during World War II. Depicts life on the Burma Railway.Some Like It Hot is an American romantic screwball comedy film, made in 1958 and released in 1959, which was directed by Billy Wilder and starred Marilyn Monroe, Tony Curtis, Jack Lemmon and George Raft.The supporting cast includes Joe E. Brown, Pat O'Brien, Joan Shawlee and Nehemiah Persoff.The film is a remake by Wilder and I. A. L. Diamond of a 1935 French movie, Fanfare d'Amour, from a story by Robert Thoeren and Michael Logan, which was also remade in 1951 by German director Kurt Hoffmann as Fanfaren der Liebe. However, the plots of the French and German films did not include the gangster motif, which is an integral part of the drama in Some Like It Hot. Wilder's working titles for his film were Fanfares of Love and Not Tonight, Josephine before he decided on Some Like It Hot as its release title.During 1981, after the worldwide success of the French drag comedy La Cage aux Folles, United Artists re-released Some Like It Hot to theatres. In 2000, the American Film Institute listed Some Like It Hot as the greatest American comedy film of all time.It is February 1929 in the city of Chicago. Two friends who are struggling jazz musicians, Joe (Tony Curtis), a saxophone player, irresponsible gambler and ladies' man, and Jerry (Jack Lemmon), a sensible double-bass player, accidentally witness the Saint Valentine's Day massacre. When the gangsters, led by "Spats" Colombo (George Raft), spot them, the two have to run for their lives.Penniless, freezing cold, and in a rush to get out of town, the two musicians take a job in a women's band headed to Miami. Disguised as women and calling themselves Josephine and Daphne, they board a train with Sweet Sue and her Society Syncopators, an all-girl band and their male manager, Bienstock. Before they board the train, Joe and Jerry have already noticed Sugar Kane (Marilyn Monroe), the band's vocalist and ukulele player, marveling over how she walks "like Jell-O on springs," as they struggle along in their high heels not at all sure they will be able to pass as women. As they board the train, however, Daphne experiences the kind of sexual harassment common to women when Bienstock feels her up.Both Joe and Jerry become enamored of Sugar and compete for her affection while maintaining their disguises. Sugar confides that she has sworn off male saxophone players, who have stolen her heart in the past and left her with "the fuzzy end of the lollipop". She has now set her sights on finding a sweet, bespectacled millionaire in Florida. During the forbidden drinking and partying on the train with all the women in the band, Josephine and Daphne become intimate friends with Sugar, and continually have to struggle to remember that they are girls and cannot make a pass at her.Once in Miami, Joe woos Sugar by assuming a second disguise as a millionaire named Junior, the heir to Shell Oil, while mimicking Cary Grant's voice and feigning disinterest in Sugar. An actual millionaire, an aging mama's boy, the much-married Osgood Fielding III (Joe E. Brown), tries repeatedly to pick up Daphne, who repeatedly rebuffs him. One night Osgood invites Daphne for a champagne supper on his yacht. Joe convinces Daphne to keep Osgood occupied onshore, so that Junior can take Sugar to Osgood's yacht, passing it off as his. Once on the yacht, Junior uses metaphors to explain to Sugar that unfortunately, due to psychological trauma, he is impotent and frigid, but that he would certainly marry anyone who could change that. Sugar tries desperately to arouse some sexual response in Junior, and begins to succeed. Meanwhile, Daphne and Osgood dance the tango till dawn.When Joe and Jerry get back to the hotel, Jerry happily explains that Osgood has proposed and that he has accepted. Joe finally convinces Jerry that he can't actually marry Osgood. Joe then breaks Sugar's heart by telling her that he, Junior, has to marry a woman of his father's choosing and move to Venezuela.Many mobsters arrive at the hotel for a conference honoring the Friends of Italian Opera. Spats and his gang from Chicago eventually recognize Joe and Jerry as the witnesses to the Valentine's Day murders. After several humorous but potentially lethal chases, Joe and Jerry end up witnessing additional mob killings, this time of Spats and his crew. Once again Joe and Jerry have to run for their lives. Joe, dressed as Josephine, sees Sugar onstage singing sadly that she will never love again. He kisses her before he leaves, and Sugar suddenly understands that Joe is both Josephine and Junior.Sugar runs from the stage at the end of her performance and is able to jump into the launch from Osgood's yacht just as it is leaving the dock with Joe, Jerry and Osgood in it. Joe tells Sugar that he is not good enough for her, that she would be getting the "fuzzy end of the lollipop" yet again, but Sugar wants him anyway. Jerry, for his part, tries to explain to Osgood that Daphne cannot marry him, offering a series of objections: Daphne smokes a lot; Daphne can't get married in Osgood's mother's dress ("we are not built the same way"); Daphne sadly "can never have children". Osgood dismisses all this information as insignificant; he loves Daphne and is determined to marry her. Finally, exasperated, Jerry removes his wig and says in his male voice, "I'm a man!", but a smiling Osgood overrides this final obstacle with the film's last line, "Well... nobody's perfect!"Aside from the title, the film bears no resemblance to a Bob Hope movie of the same name released in 1939.The film was planned originally to be filmed in colour,[citation needed] but after several screen tests, it was changed to black and white because of the very obvious 'green tint' of the heavy make-up required by Curtis and Lemmon when portraying Josephine and Daphne. The Florida segment, at the fictitious "Seminole Ritz", was filmed at the Hotel Del Coronado in Coronado, California.[1]Some Like It Hot received a "C" (Condemned) rating from the National Legion of Decency (formerly the Catholic Legion of Decency). The film, along with Alfred Hitchcock's Psycho (1960) and several other films, contributed to the end of the Production Code in the mid-1960s. It was released by United Artists without the MPAA logo in the credits or title sequence, since the film did not receive Production Code approval.Tony Curtis is frequently quoted as saying that kissing Marilyn Monroe was like "kissing Hitler". However, during a 2001 interview with Leonard Maltin, Curtis stated that he had never made this claim.[2] In his 2008 autobiography, Curtis notes that he did make the statement to the film crew, but it was meant in a joking manner.[3] During his appearance at the Jules Verne Festival in France (2008), Curtis revealed on the set of Laurent Ruquier's TV show that he and Monroe were lovers in the late 1940s when they were first struggling for recognition in films.The film's title is a line from the nursery rhyme "Pease Porridge Hot". It also occurs as dialogue in the film when Joe, as "Junior", tells Sugar he prefers classical music over hot jazz. The film's working title was Fanfares of Love, then Not Tonight, Josephine, before the release title was finally decided as Some Like It Hot.Some Like it Hot received widespread critical acclaim. Rotten Tomatoes reports a score of 98% out of 100, with an average score of 8.9 out of 10. Roger Ebert says about the movie, "Wilder's 1959 comedy is one of the enduring treasures of the movies, a film of inspiration and meticulous craft."The film was awarded an Academy Award for Best Costume Design, Black-and-White (Orry-Kelly) and was nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role (Jack Lemmon), Best Art Direction-Set Decoration, Black-and-White (Ted Haworth, Edward G. Boyle), Best Cinematography, Black-and-White, Academy Award for Best Director and Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium.[4]It won the Golden Globe for Best Motion Picture - Comedy. Marilyn Monroe won the Golden Globe for Best Actress in Musical or Comedy, and Jack Lemmon for Best Actor in Musical or Comedy.The film has been acclaimed worldwide as one of the greatest films ever made. In 1989, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant," going in on the first year of voting.In 2000, readers of Total Film magazine voted it the eighth greatest comedy film of all time. In 2002, Channel 4 ranked Some Like It Hot as the fifth greatest film ever made in their 100 Greatest Films Poll.In 2011, ABC aired a primetime special, Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time, that counted down the best films chosen by fans based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and People. Some Like it Hot was selected as the #3 Best Comedy.An unsold television pilot was filmed by Mirisch Productions in 1961 featuring Vic Damone and Tina Louise. As a favour to the production company, Jack Lemmon and Tony Curtis agreed to film cameo appearances, returning as their original characters, Daphne and Josephine, at the beginning of the pilot. Their appearance sees them in a hospital where Jerry (Lemmon) is being treated for his impacted back tooth and Joe (Curtis) is the same O blood type.[5]During 1972, a musical play based on the screenplay of the film, entitled Sugar, opened on Broadway, starring Elaine Joyce, Robert Morse, Tony Roberts and Cyril Ritchard, with book by Peter Stone, lyrics by Bob Merrill, and (all-new) music by Jule Styne. A 1991 production of this show in London featured Tommy Steele and retained the original title. In 2002, Tony Curtis performed in a stage production of the film. He portrayed the character originally played by Joe E. Brown.March 29, 1959(1959-03-29)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception5 Awards and honors6 Soundtrack7 Adaptations8 See also9 References10 External linksMarilyn Monroe as Sugar "Kane" KowalczykTony Curtis as Joe/"Josephine"/"Shell Junior"Jack Lemmon as Jerry (Gerald)/"Daphne" George Raft as "Spats" ColomboJoe E. Brown as Osgood Fielding III.Pat O'Brien as Detective MulliganNehemiah Persoff as "Little Bonaparte"Joan Shawlee as Bandleader Sweet SueBilly Gray as Sig Poliakoff, Joe and Jerrys agentGeorge E. Stone as "Toothpick" CharlieDave Barry as Bandmanager BeinstockMike Mazurki as Spats's henchman #1Harry Wilson as Spats's henchman #2Beverly Wills as Dolores, trombone, Sugars apartment friendBabara Drew as Nellie, Poliakoffs secretaryEdward G. Robinson, Jr. as Bellboy Johnny Paradiseuncredited roles:Mary Foley as violin playerColleen O'Sullivan a.k.a. Penny McGuiggan as Maude, trumpetJoan Kayne a.k.a. Joan Fields as Betty, clarinetJoan Waldor as drummerHelen Perry as Stella, tromboneSandra Warner as Emily, saxophoneGloria Tracy a.k.a. Tracy Moss as Gloria, harpLaurie Mitchell as Mary Lou, trumpetMarian Collier as Olga, clarinetGrace Whitney as Rosella, trumpetPat Holbrook as band memberDiane Boothe as band memberKay Rickman as Hortensia, violinAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - #14AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs - #1AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions - NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Songs:

Runnin' Wild - Nominated

Runnin' Wild - NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"Well, nobody's perfect." - #48
"Look at that! Look how she moves. Thats just like Jell-O on springs. She must have some sort of built-in motor. I tell you, it's a whole different sex!" - Nominated

"Well, nobody's perfect." - #48"Look at that! Look how she moves. Thats just like Jell-O on springs. She must have some sort of built-in motor. I tell you, it's a whole different sex!" - NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #22AFI's 10 Top 10 - Nominated Gangster filmRunnin' Wild - Nominated"Well, nobody's perfect." - #48"Look at that! Look how she moves. Thats just like Jell-O on springs. She must have some sort of built-in motor. I tell you, it's a whole different sex!" - Nominated"I'm Through with Love", by Gus Kahn, Matty Malneck, Joseph A. "Fud" Livingston. Performed by Marilyn Monroe."I Wanna Be Loved by You", by Bert Kalmar, Herbert Stothart, Harry Ruby. Sung by Monroe."Some Like It Hot", by Matty Malneck and I.A.L. Diamond. Performed by Monroe"Runnin' Wild", by A.H. Gibbs, Joe Grey, Leo Wood. Sung by Monroe."Down Among the Sheltering Palms", by Olmar-Brockman."Sugar Blues", by Williams-Fletcher."By the Beautiful Sea", by Harry Carroll, Harold R. Atteridge."Sweet Georgia Brown", by Ben Bernie, Maceo Pinkard, Kenneth Casey."La Cumparsita", written by Gerardo Matos Rodrguez."Stairway to the Stars", music by Matt Malneck and Frank Signorelli."Liebestrume" by Franz LisztCross-dressing in film and televisionBollywood remake Rafoo ChakkarCurtis, Tony. The Making of Some Like It Hot, Wiley & Sons, Hoboken NJ, 2009. ISBN 978-0-470-53721-3.Maslon, Laurence. Some Like It Hot: The Official 50th Anniversary Companion, New York, HarperCollins, 2009. ISBN 978-0-06-176123-2.Some Like It Hot at the Internet Movie DatabaseSome Like It Hot at the TCM Movie DatabaseSome Like It Hot at AllRoviRoger Ebert's review of Some Like It HotLiteratureStar Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, originally released as Star Wars,[3] is a 1977 American epic space opera film[4] written and directed by George Lucas. It is the first film released in the Star Wars saga and is the fourth installment in terms of the series' internal chronology. Groundbreaking in its use of special effects, unconventional editing, and science fiction/fantasy storytelling, the original Star Wars is one of the most successful and influential films of all time.Set "a long time ago in a galaxy far, far away", the film follows a group of freedom fighters known as the Rebel Alliance as they plot to destroy the powerful Death Star space station, a devastating weapon created by the evil Galactic Empire. This conflict disrupts the isolated life of farmboy Luke Skywalker when he inadvertently acquires the droids carrying the stolen plans to the Death Star. After the Empire begins a cruel and destructive search for the droids, Skywalker decides to accompany Jedi Knight Obi-Wan Kenobi on a daring mission to rescue the owner of the droids, rebel leader Princess Leia, and save the galaxy.Produced with a budget of $11million and released on May 25, 1977, the film earned $460million in the United States and $314million overseas, surpassing Jaws as the nominal highest-grossing film and remained that way until being surpassed by E.T. the Extra Terrestrial in 1982. When adjusted for inflation, it is the second highest grossing film in the US and Canada and is the third highest-grossing in the world as of 2012. Among the many awards the film received, it gained ten Academy Award nominations, winning six; the nominations included Best Supporting Actor for Alec Guinness and Best Picture. The film is often ranked among the best films of all time. Lucas has re-released the film on several occasions, sometimes with significant changes; the most notable versions are the 1997 Special Edition, the 2004 DVD release, and the 2011 Blu-ray release, which have modified computer-generated effects, altered dialogue, and added scenes.The film begins with an opening crawl explaining that the galaxy is in a state of civil war and that spies for the Rebel Alliance have stolen plans to the Galactic Empire's Death Star, a heavily armed and armored space station capable of annihilating an entire planet. Rebel leader Princess Leia (Carrie Fisher) is in possession of the plans, but her ship is captured by Imperial forces under the command of the evil lord Darth Vader (David Prowse, voiced by James Earl Jones). Before she is captured, Leia hides the plans in the memory of an astromech droid called R2-D2 (Kenny Baker), along with a holographic recording. The small droid flees to the surface of the desert planet Tatooine with fellow protocol droid C-3PO (Anthony Daniels).The droids are quickly captured by Jawa traders, who sell the pair to moisture farmers Owen and Beru Lars (Phil Brown and Shelagh Fraser) and their nephew, Luke Skywalker (Mark Hamill). While Luke is cleaning R2-D2, he accidentally triggers part of Leia's message, in which she requests help from Obi-Wan Kenobi. The only "Kenobi" Luke knows of is an old hermit named Ben Kenobi (Alec Guinness) who lives in the nearby hills. The next morning, upon finding R2-D2 after he escapes to seek Obi-Wan, Luke meets Ben Kenobi, revealing himself to be Obi-Wan. Obi-Wan tells Luke of his days as a Jedi Knight, one of a faction of former galactic peacekeepers who were wiped out by the Empire. Contrary to his uncle's statements, Luke learns that his father Anakin Skywalker fought alongside Obi-Wan as a Jedi Knight before he was betrayed and killed by Vader, Obi-Wan's former pupil who turned to the "dark side of the Force", and gives Luke his father's lightsaber.Obi-Wan views Leia's complete message in which she begs Obi-Wan to take the Death Star plans to her home planet of Alderaan for her father to retrieve and analyze. He then asks Luke to accompany him and learn the ways of the Force. Luke initially refuses, but changes his mind after discovering that Imperial stormtroopers have destroyed his home and killed his aunt and uncle in search of C-3PO and R2-D2. Obi-Wan and Luke hire smuggler Han Solo (Harrison Ford) and his Wookiee first mate Chewbacca (Peter Mayhew) to transport them on their ship, the Millennium Falcon.Upon the Falcon's arrival at Alderaan, they find that the planet has been destroyed under the orders of the Death Star's commanding officer Grand Moff Tarkin (Peter Cushing) to demonstrate the Death Star's power. The Falcon is caught by the nearby Death Star's tractor beam and brought into its hangar bay. While Obi-Wan goes off to disable the tractor beam, Luke discovers that Leia is imprisoned on board and, with the help of Han and Chewbacca, rescues her. After several harrowing escapes, they make their way back to the Falcon, but Obi-Wan sacrifices himself in a lightsaber duel with Vader. The Falcon escapes the Death Star but the Empire has placed a tracking device on the ship to follow them to the rebels' hidden base on Yavin IV.The rebels analyze the Death Star plans, disclosing a vulnerable exhaust port leading to the station's main reactor. Luke joins the assault team, but Han collects his reward for the rescue and plans to leave despite Luke asking him to stay. The rebels suffer heavy losses after several failed attack runs, leaving Luke one of the few surviving pilots. Vader and a group of TIE fighters are about to destroy Luke's ship, but Han Solo returns at the last moment and destroys the TIE Fighters and the blast sends Vader spiraling away. Then Luke successfully destroys the Death Star seconds before it can fire on the rebel base. Luke and Han are subsequently awarded medals by Leia for their heroism.Lucas shared a joint casting session with long-time friend Brian De Palma, who was casting his own film Carrie. As a result, Carrie Fisher and Sissy Spacek auditioned for both films in each other's respective roles. Lucas favored casting young actors without long-time experience. While reading for Luke Skywalker (then known as "Luke Starkiller"), Hamill found the dialogue to be extremely odd because of its universe-embedded concepts. He chose to simply read it sincerely and was selected instead of William Katt, who was subsequently cast in Carrie.[5][6]Lucas initially rejected the idea of using Harrison Ford, as he had previously worked with him on American Graffiti, and instead asked Ford to assist in the auditions by reading lines with the other actors and explaining the concepts and history behind the scenes that they were reading. Lucas was eventually won over by Ford's portrayal and cast him instead of Kurt Russell, Nick Nolte,[6] Sylvester Stallone,[7] Christopher Walken, Billy Dee Williams (who would play Lando Calrissian in the sequels), and Perry King, who wound up playing Solo in the radio plays.[5][8]Many young actresses in Hollywood auditioned for the role of Princess Leia, including Cindy Williams.[5] Carrie Fisher was cast under the condition that she lose 10 pounds for the role. Aware that the studio disagreed with his refusal to cast big-name stars, Lucas signed veteran stage and screen actors Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi and Peter Cushing as Tarkin.[5] Additional casting took place in London, where Mayhew was cast as Chewbacca after he stood up to greet Lucas.[9] Lucas immediately turned to Gary Kurtz, and requested that Mayhew be cast. Daniels auditioned for and was cast as C-3PO; he has said that he wanted the role after he saw a McQuarrie drawing of the character and was struck by the vulnerability in the robot's face.[5][10]Elements of the history of Star Wars are commonly disputed, as Lucas' statements about it have changed over time.[a 1] George Lucas completed directing his first full-length feature, THX 1138, in 1971. He has said that it was around this time that he first had the idea for Star Wars,[11] though he has also claimed to have had the idea long before then.[12] One of the most influential works on Lucas's early concepts was the Flash Gordon space adventure comics and serials.[13] Lucas even made an attempt to purchase the rights to remake Flash Gordon at one point, but could not afford them.[14] Friend and collaborator Walter Murch suggested in an interview that Star Wars was Lucas' "transubstantiated version of Apocalypse Now"; at one time, Lucas had planned to direct that film.[15]Following the completion of THX 1138, Lucas was granted a two-film development deal with United Artists at the Cannes Film Festival in May of that year for American Graffiti, and an idea for a space opera he called The Star Wars. He showed United Artists the script for American Graffiti, but they passed on the film. Universal Studios picked the film up,[16] and Lucas spent the next two years completing it. Only then did he turn his attention to The Star Wars. He began writing the treatment in January 1973, unsure what would come of Graffiti, and still very much in debt.[16]Lucas began his creation process by taking small notes, inventing odd names and assigning them possible characterizations. Lucas would discard many of these by the time the final script was written, but he included several names and places in the final script or its sequels (such as Luke Skywalker and Han Solo). He revived others decades later when he wrote his prequel trilogy (such as Mace Windy, renamed Windu). He used these initial names and ideas to compile a two-page synopsis titled "The Journal of the Whills", which bore little resemblance to the final story.[17] The Journal told the tale of the son of a famous pilot who is trained as a "padawaan" apprentice of a revered "Jedi-Bendu".[17] Frustrated after being told that his story was too difficult to understand,[18] Lucas started again on a completely new outline, this time borrowing heavily from Akira Kurosawa's The Hidden Fortress,[19] so much so that he at one time considered buying the rights to the film.[20] He relied on a plot synopsis from Donald Richie's book The Films of Akira Kurosawa and wrote a 14-page draft that paralleled The Hidden Fortress, with names and settings reminiscent of the science fiction genre.[21]Both United Artists and Universal passed on their options for the film later that year, citing the risk involved in the project's potentially high budget. Lucas pursued Alan Ladd, Jr., the head of 20th Century Fox, and in June 1973 closed a deal to write and direct the film. Although Ladd did not grasp the technical side of the project, he believed that Lucas was talented. Lucas later stated that Ladd "invested in me, he did not invest in the movie."[5] The deal afforded Lucas $150,000 to write and direct.Later that year, Lucas began writing a full script of his synopsis, which he would complete in May 1974. In this script he reintroduced the Jedi, which had been absent in his previous treatment, as well as their enemies, the Sith. He changed the protagonist, who had been a mature General in the treatment, to an adolescent boy, and he shifted the General into a supporting role as a member of a family of dwarfs.[5][22] Lucas envisioned the Corellian smuggler, Han Solo, as a large, green-skinned monster with gills (this would turn out to be Greedo, whom Han would shoot in the Mos Eisley Cantina when we first meet his character). He based Chewbacca on his Alaskan Malamute dog, Indiana, (whom he would later use as namesake for his next hero Indiana Jones), who often acted as the director's "co-pilot" by sitting in the passenger seat of his car.[22]Many of the final elements in the film began to take shape, though the plot[23] was still far removed from the final script. It did, however, begin to diverge from The Hidden Fortress and take on the general story elements that would comprise the final film. Lucas began researching the science fiction genre, both watching films and reading books and comics.[24] His first script incorporated ideas from many new sources. The script would also introduce the concept of a Jedi master father and his son, training to be a Jedi under the father's Jedi friend, which would ultimately form the basis for the film and even the trilogy. However, in this draft, the father is a hero who is still alive at the start of the film.[25] The script was also the first time Darth Vader appeared in the story, though other than being a villain, he bore little resemblance to the final character.Lucas grew distracted by other projects, but he would return to complete a second draft of The Star Wars by January 1975; while still having some differences in the characters and relationships. For example, the protagonist Luke (Starkiller in this draft) had several brothers, as well as his father who appears in a minor role at the end of the film. The script became more of a fairy tale quest as opposed to the more grounded action-adventure of the previous versions. This version ended with another text crawl which previewed the next story in the series. This draft was also the first to introduce the concept of a Jedi turning to the dark side; a historical Jedi that became the first to ever fall to the dark side, and then trained the Sith to use it. Lucas hired conceptual artist Ralph McQuarrie to create paintings of certain scenes around this time. When Lucas delivered his screenplay to the studio, he included several of McQuarrie's paintings.[26]A third draft, dated August 1, 1975, was titled The Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Starkiller which now had most of the elements of the final plot, with only some differences in the characters and settings. Luke was again an only child, and his father was, for the first time, written as dead. This script would be re-written for the fourth and final draft, dated January 1, 1976 as The Adventures of Luke Starkiller as taken from the Journal of the Whills. Saga I: Star Wars. Lucas worked with his friends Gloria Katz and Willard Huyck to revise the fourth draft into the final pre-production script.[27] 20th Century Fox approved a budget of $8,250,000; American Graffiti, having been released in 1973 to positive reviews, allowed Lucas to renegotiate his deal with Alan Ladd, Jr. and request the sequel rights to the film. For Lucas, this deal protected Star Wars' unwritten segments and most of the merchandising profits.[5][28] Lucas would continue to tweak the script during shooting, most notably adding the death of Kenobi after realizing he served no purpose in the ending of the film.[29][30]Lucas has often stated that the entire original trilogy was, in essence, intended as one film. However, he said that his story material for The Star Wars was too long for one film, so he opted to split the story into multiple films.[5][31][32] He also stated the story evolved over time and that "There was never a script completed that had the entire story as it exists now [1983]... As the stories unfolded, I would take certain ideas and save them[...] I kept taking out all the good parts, and I just kept telling myself I would make other movies someday."[33] Lucas's second draft is often cited as the script he is referring to in relation to this issue[34] and in The Secret History of Star Wars, Michael Kaminski argues that this draft is structurally very similar to the final film in plot arrangement, although the only elements from it that were saved for the sequels were an asteroid field space chase (moved to The Empire Strikes Back) and a forest battle involving Wookiees (moved to Return of the Jedi, with Ewoks in place of Wookiees).[34]In 1975, Lucas founded the visual effects company Industrial Light & Magic (ILM) after discovering that 20th Century Fox's visual effects department had been disbanded. ILM began its work on Star Wars in a warehouse in Van Nuys, California. Most of the visual effects used motion control photography, which creates the illusion of size by employing small models and slowly moving cameras. Model spaceships were constructed on the basis of drawings by Joe Johnston, input from Lucas, and paintings by McQuarrie. Lucas opted to abandon the traditional sleekness of science fiction by creating a "used universe" in which all devices, ships, and buildings looked aged and dirty.[5][35][36]When principal photography began on March 22, 1976 in the Tunisian desert for the scenes on the planet Tatooine, the project faced several problems.[37] Lucas fell behind schedule in the first week of shooting due to a rare Tunisian rainstorm, malfunctioning props, and electronic breakdowns.[37][38] When actor Anthony Daniels wore the C-3PO outfit for the first time, the left leg piece shattered down through the plastic covering his left foot, stabbing him. After completing filming in Tunisia, production moved into the more controlled environment of Elstree Studios, near London.[38] However, significant problems, such as a crew that had little interest in the film, still arose.[5][38] Most of the crew considered the project a "children's film", rarely took their work seriously, and often found it unintentionally humorous.[5][39] Actor Kenny Baker later confessed that he thought the film would be a failure. Harrison Ford found the film "weird" in that there was a Princess with buns for hair and what he called a "giant in a monkey suit" named Chewbacca. Ford also found the dialogue difficult: "George, you can type this shit, but you can't say it!"[40]Lucas clashed with cinematographer Gilbert Taylor, BSC, whom producer Gary Kurtz called "old-school" and "crotchety". Moreover, with a background in independent filmmaking, Lucas was accustomed to creating most of the elements of the film himself. His lighting suggestions were rejected by an offended Taylor, who felt that Lucas was overstepping his boundaries by giving specific instructions and sometimes even moving lights and cameras himself. Taylor refused to use the soft-focus lenses and gauze Lucas wanted after Fox executives complained about the look.[41] Lucas eventually became frustrated that the costumes, sets and other elements were not living up to his original vision of Star Wars. He rarely spoke to the actors, who felt that he expected too much of them while providing little direction. His directions to the actors usually consisted of the words "faster" and "more intense".[5]Ladd offered Lucas some of the only support from the studio; he dealt with scrutiny from board members over the rising budget and complex screenplay drafts. After production fell two weeks behind schedule, Ladd told Lucas that he had to finish production within a week or he would be forced to shut down production. The crew split into three units, led by Lucas, Kurtz, and production supervisor Robert Watts. Under the new system, the project met the studio's deadline.[5][38]During production, the cast attempted to make Lucas laugh or smile as he often appeared depressed. At one point, the project became so demanding that Lucas was diagnosed with hypertension and exhaustion and was warned to reduce his stress level.[5][38] Post-production was equally stressful due to increasing pressure from 20th Century Fox. Moreover, Mark Hamill's car accident left his face visibly scarred, which suppressed re-shoots.[38]Star Wars was originally slated for release in Christmas 1976; however, delays pushed the film's release to summer 1977. Already anxious about meeting his deadline, Lucas was shocked when editor John Jympson's first cut of the film was a "complete disaster". According to an article in Star Wars Insider No. 41 by David West Reynolds, this first edit of Star Wars contained about 3040% different footage from the final version. This included scenes that have never been seen elsewhere along with alternate takes of existing scenes. After attempting to persuade Jympson to cut the film his way, Lucas replaced him with Paul Hirsch and Richard Chew. He also allowed his then-wife Marcia Lucas to aid the editing process while she was cutting the film New York, New York with Lucas's friend Martin Scorsese. Richard Chew found the film had an unenergetic pace; it had been cut in a by-the-book manner: scenes were played out in master shots that flowed into close-up coverage. He found that the pace was dictated by the actors instead of the cuts. Hirsch and Chew worked on two reels simultaneously; whoever finished first moved on to the next.[5]Meanwhile, Industrial Light & Magic was struggling to achieve unprecedented special effects. The company had spent half of its budget on four shots that Lucas deemed unacceptable.[38] Moreover, theories surfaced that the workers at ILM lacked discipline, forcing Lucas to intervene frequently to ensure that they were on schedule. With hundreds of uncompleted shots remaining, ILM was forced to finish a year's work in six months. Lucas inspired ILM by editing together aerial dogfights from old war films, which enhanced the pacing of the scenes.[5]During the chaos of production and post-production, the team made decisions about character voicing and sound effects. Sound designer Ben Burtt had created a library of sounds that Lucas referred to as an "organic soundtrack". Blaster sounds were a modified recording of a steel cable, under tension, being struck. For Chewbacca's growls, Burtt recorded and combined sounds made by dogs, bears, lions, tigers and walruses to create phrases and sentences. Lucas and Burtt created the robotic voice of R2-D2 by filtering their voices through an electronic synthesizer. Darth Vader's breathing was achieved by Burtt breathing through the mask of a scuba regulator implanted with a microphone.[42] Lucas never intended to use the voice of David Prowse, who portrayed Darth Vader in costume, because of Prowse's English West Country accent. He originally wanted Orson Welles to speak for Darth Vader. However, he felt that Welles' voice would be too recognizable, so he cast the lesser-known James Earl Jones.[6] Nor did Lucas intend to use Anthony Daniels' voice for C-3PO. Thirty well-established voice actors read for the voice of the droid. According to Daniels, one of the major voice actors, believed by some sources to be Stan Freberg, recommended Daniels' voice for the role.[5][22]When Lucas screened an early cut of the film for his friends, among them directors Brian De Palma, John Milius, and Steven Spielberg, their reactions were disappointing. Spielberg, who claimed to have been the only person in the audience to have enjoyed the film, believed that the lack of enthusiasm was due to the absence of finished special effects. Lucas later said that the group was honest and seemed bemused by the film. In contrast, Alan Ladd, Jr. and the rest of 20th Century Fox loved the film: one of the executives, Gareth Wigan, told Lucas, "This is the greatest film I've ever seen", and cried during the screening. Lucas found the experience shocking and rewarding, having never gained any approval from studio executives before.[5] The delays increased the budget from $8million to $11million.[43]According to Lucas, the film was inspired by numerous sources, such as Beowulf and King Arthur for the origins of myth and world religions.[5] Lucas originally wanted to rely heavily on the 1930s Flash Gordon film serials; however, he resorted to Akira Kurosawa's film The Hidden Fortress and Joseph Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces because of copyright issues with Flash Gordon.[44] Star Wars features several parallels to Buck Rogers and Flash Gordon, such as the conflict between Rebels and Imperial Forces, the "wipes" between scenes, and the famous opening crawl that begins each film. A concept borrowed from Flash Gordona fusion of futuristic technology and traditional magicwas originally developed by one of the founders of science fiction, H. G. Wells. Wells believed the Industrial Revolution had quietly destroyed the idea that fairy-tale magic might be real. Thus, he found that plausibility was required to allow myth to work properly, and substituted elements of the Industrial Era: time machines instead of magic carpets, Martians instead of dragons, and scientists instead of wizards. Wells called his new genre "scientific fantasia".[45]Star Wars was influenced by the 1958 Kurosawa film The Hidden Fortress; for instance, the two bickering peasants evolved into C-3PO and R2-D2, and a Japanese family crest seen in the film is similar to the Imperial Crest. Star Wars also borrows heavily from another Kurosawa film, Yojimbo. In both films, several men threaten the hero, bragging how wanted they are by authorities. The situation ends with an arm being cut off by a blade. Kuwabatake Sanjuro (portrayed by Toshir Mifune) is offered "twenty-five ryo now, twenty-five when you complete the mission", whereas Han Solo is offered "Two thousand now, plus fifteen when we reach Alderaan." Lucas's affection for Kurosawa may have influenced his decision to visit Japan in the early 1970s, leading some to believe he borrowed the name "Jedi" from jidaigeki (which in English means "period dramas", and refers to films typically featuring samurai).[45]Tatooine is similar to Arrakis from Frank Herbert's book Dune. Arrakis is the only known source of a longevity drug called the Spice Melange. References to "spice", various illegal stimulant drugs, occur throughout the last three films of the Star Wars saga. In the original film, Han Solo is a spice smuggler who has been through the spice mines of Kessel. In the conversation at Obi-Wan Kenobi's home between Obi-Wan and Luke, Luke expresses a belief that his father was a navigator on a spice freighter. Other similarities include those between Princess Leia and Princess Alia (/li/), and between Jedi mind tricks and "The Voice", a controlling ability used by Bene Gesserit. In passing, Uncle Owen and Aunt Beru are "Moisture Farmers"; in Dune, Dew Collectors are used by Fremen to "provide a small but reliable source of water."[46] Frank Herbert reported that, "David Lynch, [director of 1984 film Dune] had trouble with the fact that Star Wars used up so much of Dune." The pair found "sixteen points of identity" and they calculated that, "the odds against coincidence produced a number larger than the number of stars in the universe."[47]The Death Star assault scene was modeled after the film The Dam Busters (1955), in which Royal Air Force Lancaster bombers fly along heavily defended reservoirs and aim "bouncing bombs" at their man-made dams to cripple the heavy industry of the Ruhr. Some of the dialogue in The Dam Busters is repeated in the Star Wars climax; Gilbert Taylor also filmed the special effects sequences in The Dam Busters. In addition, the sequence was partially inspired by the climax of the film 633 Squadron (1964) directed by Walter Grauman,[48] in which RAF Mosquitos attack a German heavy water plant by flying down a narrow fjord to drop special bombs at a precise point while avoiding anti-aircraft guns and German fighters. Clips from both films were included in Lucas's temporary dogfight footage version of the sequence.[13]The opening shot of Star Wars, in which a detailed spaceship fills the screen overhead, is a nod to the scene introducing the interplanetary spacecraft Discovery One in Stanley Kubrick's seminal 1968 film 2001: A Space Odyssey. The earlier big-budget science fiction film influenced the look of Star Wars in many other ways, including the use of EVA pods and hexagonal corridors. The Death Star has a docking bay reminiscent of the one on the orbiting space station in 2001.[49] The film also draws on The Wizard of Oz (1939): similarities exist between Jawas and Munchkins; the main characters disguise themselves as enemy soldiers; and when Obi-Wan dies, he leaves only his empty robe, similar to the melting of the Wicked Witch of the West. Also of note is that Luke lives on a farm with his uncle and aunt like Dorothy.[50] Although golden and male, C-3PO is inspired by the robot Maria, the Maschinenmensch from Fritz Lang's 1927 film Metropolis. His whirring sounds were speculated to be inspired by the clanking noises of The Wizard of Oz character the Tin Woodsman and C-3PO has an arc throughout the Star Wars saga that is similar to the arc of the Cowardly Lion.[51]On the recommendation of his friend Steven Spielberg, Lucas hired composer John Williams, who had worked with Spielberg on the film Jaws, for which he won an Academy Award. Lucas felt that the film would portray visually foreign worlds, but that the musical score would give the audience an emotional familiarity. In March 1977, Williams conducted the London Symphony Orchestra to record the Star Wars soundtrack in twelve days.[5]Lucas wanted a grand musical sound for Star Wars, with leitmotifs to provide distinction. Therefore, he assembled his favorite orchestral pieces for the soundtrack, until John Williams convinced him that an original score would be unique and more unified. However, a few of Williams' pieces were influenced by the tracks given to him by Lucas. The "Main Title Theme" was inspired by the theme from the 1942 film Kings Row, scored by Erich Wolfgang Korngold, and the track "Dune Sea of Tatooine" drew from the soundtrack from Bicycle Thieves, scored by Alessandro Cicognini. The American Film Institute's list of best scores lists the Star Wars soundtrack at number one.[52]Charles Lippincott was hired by Lucas's production company, Lucasfilm Ltd., as marketing director for Star Wars. As 20th Century Fox gave little support for marketing beyond licensing T-shirts and posters, Lippincott was forced to look elsewhere. He secured deals with Stan Lee, Roy Thomas and Marvel Comics for a comic book adaptation and with Del Rey Books for a novelization. A fan of science fiction, he used his contacts to promote the film at the San Diego Comic-Con and elsewhere within fandom. Worried that Star Wars would be beaten out by other summer films, such as Smokey and the Bandit, 20th Century Fox moved the release date to the Wednesday before Memorial Day: May 25, 1977. However, fewer than forty theaters ordered the film to be shown. In response, 20th Century Fox demanded that theaters order Star Wars if they wanted an eagerly anticipated film based on a best-selling novel titled The Other Side of Midnight.[5] Lucas himself was not able to predict how successful Star Wars would be. After visiting the set of the Steven Spielberg-directed Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Lucas was sure Close Encounters would outperform the yet-to-be-released Star Wars at the box office. Spielberg disagreed, and felt Lucas's Star Wars would be the bigger hit. With each Lucas and Spielberg confident that the other's film would be the bigger hit, Lucas proposed they trade 2.5% of the profit on each other's films. Spielberg took the trade, and still receives 2.5% of the profits from Star Wars.[53]Within three weeks of the film's release, 20th Century Fox's stock price doubled to a record high. Before 1977, 20th Century Fox's greatest annual profits were $37,000,000; in 1977, the company earned $79,000,000. Although the film's cultural neutrality helped it to gain international success, Ladd became anxious during the premiere in Japan. After the screening, the audience was silent, leading him to fear that the film would be unsuccessful. Ladd was later told that, in Japan, silence was the greatest honor to a film. When Star Wars made an unprecedented second opening at Mann's Chinese Theatre on August 3, 1977 after Sorcerer failed, thousands of people attended a ceremony in which C-3PO, R2-D2, and Darth Vader placed their footprints in the theater's forecourt.[54][5] Some cinemas continuously screened the film for more than a year.Little Star Wars merchandise was available for several months after the film's debut; only Kenner Toys had accepted Lippincott's licensing offers. Kenner responded to the sudden demand for toys by selling boxed vouchers in its "empty box" Christmas campaign. Television commercials told children and parents that vouchers within a "Star Wars Early Bird Certificate Package" could be redeemed for toys "between February 1 and June 1".[5]In 1978, at the height of the film's popularity, Smith-Hemion Productions approached Lucas with the idea of The Star Wars Holiday Special. The result is often considered a failure; Lucas himself disowned it.[55]The film was originally released as Star Wars, without "Episode IV" or the subtitle A New Hope. The 1980 sequel, The Empire Strikes Back, was numbered "Episode V" in the opening crawl. When the original film was re-released in 1981, Episode IV: A New Hope was added above the original opening crawl. Although Lucas claims that only six films were ever planned, representatives of Lucasfilm discussed plans for nine or twelve possible films in early interviews.[56] The film was re-released theatrically in 1978, 1979, 1981, 1982, and with additional scenes and enhanced special effects in 1997.On October 30, 2012, The Walt Disney Company announced a deal to acquire Lucasfilm for $4.05 billion, with approximately half in cash and half in shares of Disney stock.[57] Although Disney will now own the rights to all Star Wars films, under a previous deal with Lucasfilm, the distribution rights to A New Hope will remain with Fox "in perpetuity" while the distribution arrangements for the remaining films are set to expire in 2020. This could affect future video box set releases unless Disney and Fox come to an arrangement.[58]After ILM used computer-generated effects for Steven Spielberg's Jurassic Park, Lucas concluded that digital technology had caught up to his original vision for Star Wars.[5] For the film's 20th anniversary in 1997, A New Hope was digitally remastered and re-released to movie theaters, along with The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi, under the campaign title The Star Wars Trilogy: Special Edition. The Special Edition versions contained visual shots and scenes that were unachievable in the original release due to financial, technological, and time constraints; one such scene involved a meeting between Han Solo and Jabba the Hutt.[5] The process of creating the new visual effects for A New Hope was featured in the Academy Award-nominated IMAX documentary film, Special Effects: Anything Can Happen, directed by veteran Star Wars sound designer, Ben Burtt. Although most changes were minor or cosmetic in nature, some fans believe that Lucas degraded the movie with the additions.[59] For instance, a particularly controversial change in which a bounty hunter named Greedo shoots first when confronting Han Solo has inspired T-shirts brandishing the phrase "Han Shot First".[60]Although the Special Edition's changes were artistic, A New Hope required extensive restoration before Lucas could even attempt his modifications. It had been discovered that in addition to the negative motion picture stocks commonly used on feature films, Lucas had also used internegative film, a reversal stock which deteriorated faster than negative stocks did. This meant that the entire printing negative had to be disassembled, and the CRI (color reversal internegative) portions cleaned separately from the negative portions. Once the cleaning was complete, the film was scanned into the computer for restoration. In many cases, entire scenes had to be reconstructed from their individual elements. Fortunately, digital compositing technology allowed them to correct for problems such as alignment of mattes, "blue-spill", and so forth.[61]The film was then color-corrected and digitally printed onto a new negative, from which prints would be struck.The film was released on VHS, Betamax and Laserdisc during the 1980s and '90s by CBS/Fox Video.[62][63] The first Star Wars was released on video tape in 1982, but only to rental customers. The first sell through video tapes of Star Wars were released in 1984.[64] A THX remastered tape got on the market in 1995, followed two years later by the reworked versions in a Star Wars Trilogy: Special Edition box set.[65]A New Hope was released on DVD on September 21, 2004, in a box set with The Empire Strikes Back, Return of the Jedi, and a bonus disc of supplementary material. The movies were digitally restored and remastered, and more changes were made by George Lucas. The DVD features a commentary track from George Lucas, Ben Burtt, Dennis Muren, and Carrie Fisher. The bonus disc contains the documentary Empire of Dreams: The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy, three featurettes, teaser and theatrical trailers, TV spots, still galleries, an exclusive preview of Revenge of the Sith, a playable Xbox demo of the LucasArts game Star Wars: Battlefront, and a "Making Of" documentary on the Episode III video game.[66] The set was reissued in December 2005 as part of a three-disc "limited edition" boxed set without the bonus disc.[67]The trilogy was re-released on separate two-disc Limited Edition DVD sets from September 12 to December 31, 2006, and again in a box set on November 4, 2008;[68] the original versions of the films were added as bonus material. Controversy surrounded the release because the unaltered versions were from the 1993 non-anamorphic Laserdisc masters, and were not retransferred with modern video standards.[69]All six Star Wars films were released on Blu-ray Disc on September 16, 2011 in three different editions, with A New Hope available in both a box set of the original trilogy,[70][71] and with the other five films on Star Wars: The Complete Saga, which includes nine discs and over 40 hours of special features.[72] The original theatrical versions of the films were not included in the box set.On September 28, 2010, it was announced that all six films in the series will be converted to stereo 3D. The films are being re-released in internal chronological order beginning with The Phantom Menace on February 10, 2012. A New Hope is scheduled to be re-released in 3D in 2015.[73]Producer Gary Kurtz, on when he realized Star Wars had become a cultural phenomenon[74]Star Wars debuted on Wednesday, May 25, 1977, in 32 theaters, and eight more on Thursday and Friday. It immediately broke box-office records, effectively becoming one of the first blockbuster films, and Fox accelerated plans to broaden its release.[54] Lucas spent most of the day in a sound studio in Los Angeles. When he went out for lunch with his then-wife Marcia, they encountered a long queue of people along the sidewalks leading to Mann's Chinese Theatre, waiting to see Star Wars.[38] Even technical crew members, such as model makers, were asked for autographs, and cast members became instant household names.[5]Star Wars remains one of the most financially successful films of all time. The film earned $1,554,475 through its opening weekend ($5.96million in today's terms), building up to $7 million weekends as it entered wide release ($26.8million in today's terms).[2] It replaced Jaws as the highest-earning film in North America just six months into release,[75] eventually earning over $220 million during its initial theatrical run ($844million in today's terms).[76] Star Wars entered international release towards the end of the year, and in 1978 added the worldwide record to its domestic one,[77] earning $410 million in total.[78] Reissues in 1978, 1979, 1981, and 1982 brought its cumulative gross in Canada and the U.S. to $323 million,[79] and extended its global earnings to $530 million.[80] The film remained the highest-grossing film of all time until E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial broke that record in 1983.[81]Following the release of the Special Edition in 1997,[82] Star Wars briefly reclaimed the North American record before losing it again the following year to Titanic.[83] In total, the film has earned $775,398,007 worldwide (including $460,998,007 in North America alone).[2] Adjusted for inflation, it has earned $2.5 billion worldwide at 2011 prices, making it the most successful franchise film of all-time,[84] the Guiness World Records put it as the third highest grossing film when adjusting for inflation;[85] at the North American box-office it ranks second behind Gone with the Wind on the inflation-adjusted list.[86]Star Wars received very positive reviews from film critics. According to review aggregator, Rotten Tomatoes, 94% of 67 reviews assessed are favorable, with an average rating of 8.2/10. Its consensus states in summary, "A legendary expansive and ambitious start to the sci-fi saga, George Lucas opens our eyes to the possibilities of blockbuster film-making and things have never been the same." In his 1977 review, Roger Ebert called the film "an out-of-body experience", compared its special effects to those of 2001: A Space Odyssey, and opined that the true strength of the film was its "pure narrative".[87] Vincent Canby called the film "the movie that's going to entertain a lot of contemporary folk who have a soft spot for the virtually ritualized manners of comic-book adventure".[88] A.D. Murphy of Variety described the film as a "magnificent film" and furthermore claimed that the memories of serials along with older action epics that George Lucas set out to make as one of the biggest possible adventure fantasies as a brilliant success.[89]Conversely, Pauline Kael of The New Yorker criticized the film, stating that "there's no breather in the picture, no lyricism", and that it had no "emotional grip".[90] Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader stated, "None of these characters has any depth, and they're all treated like the fanciful props and settings."[91] Peter Keough of the Boston Phoenix said "Star Wars is a junkyard of cinematic gimcracks not unlike the Jawas' heap of purloined, discarded, barely functioning droids."[92][93]Star Wars won six Oscars at the 50th Academy Awards, including Best Art Direction, which went to John Barry, Norman Reynolds, Leslie Dilley and Roger Christian. Best Costume Design was awarded to John Mollo; Best Film Editing went to Paul Hirsch, Marcia Lucas and Richard Chew; John Stears, John Dykstra, Richard Edlund, Grant McCune and Robert Blalack all received awards for Best Visual Effects. John Williams was awarded his third Oscar for Best Original Score; the Best Sound went to Don MacDougall, Ray West, Bob Minkler and Derek Ball; and a Special Achievement for Sound Effects Editing went to Ben Burtt.[94] Additional nominations included Alec Guinness for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, George Lucas for Best Original Screenplay, Best Director, and Best Picture, which instead went to Annie Hall.[95]At the 35th Golden Globe Awards, the film was nominated for Best Motion Picture  Drama, Best Director, Best Supporting Actor (Alec Guinness), and it won the award for Best Score.[95] It received six BAFTA nominations: Best Film, Best Editing, Best Costume Design, Best Production/Art Design, Best Sound, and Best Score; the film won in the latter two categories.[95] John Williams' soundtrack album won the Grammy Award for Best Album of Original Score for a Motion Picture or Television Program,[95] and the film was awarded the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation.[95] In 1997, the MTV Movie Awards awarded to Chewbacca character the lifetime achievement award for his work in the Star Wars trilogy.[95]The film also received twelve nominations at the Saturn Awards, the oldest film-specialized awards to reward science fiction, fantasy, and horror achievements,[95] including a double nomination for Best Actor for Mark Hamill and Harrison Ford and Best Actress for Carrie Fisher. It won nine: Best Science Fiction Film, Best Direction and Best Writing for George Lucas, Best Supporting Actor for Alec Guinness, Best Music for John Williams, Best Costume for John Mollo, Best Make-up for Rick Baker and Stuart Freeborn, Best Special Effects for John Dykstra and John Stears and Outstanding Editing for Paul Hirsch, Marcia Lucas and Richard Chew.[95]Critic Roger Ebert wrote, "Like The Birth of a Nation and Citizen Kane, Star Wars was a technical watershed that influenced many of the movies that came after."[97] It began a new generation of special effects and high-energy motion pictures. The film was one of the first films to link genressuch as space opera and soap operatogether to invent a new, high concept genre for filmmakers to build upon.[35][97] Finally, along with Steven Spielberg's Jaws it shifted the film industry's focus away from personal filmmaking of the 1970s and towards fast-paced big-budget blockbusters for younger audiences.[5][97][98]After seeing Star Wars, director James Cameron quit his job as a truck driver to enter the film industry. Other filmmakers who have said to have been influenced by Star Wars include Peter Jackson, Dean Devlin, Roland Emmerich, Christopher Nolan, John Lasseter, David Fincher, Kevin Smith, John Singleton, and Ridley Scott.[35] Scott was influenced by the "used future" (where vehicles and culture are obviously dated) and extended the concept for his science fiction horror film Alien and science fiction noir film Blade Runner (which also starred Harrison Ford). Jackson used the concept for his production of The Lord of the Rings trilogy to add a sense of realism and believability.[35] Nolan cited Star Wars as an influence when making the blockbuster Inception.[99]Some critics have blamed Star Wars and also Jaws for ruining Hollywood by shifting its focus from sophisticated and relevant films such as The Godfather, Taxi Driver, and Annie Hall to films about spectacle and juvenile fantasy.[100] Peter Biskind complained for the same reason: "When all was said and done, Lucas and Spielberg returned the 1970s audience, grown sophisticated on a diet of European and New Hollywood films, to the simplicities of the pre-1960s Golden Age of movies They marched backward through the looking-glass."[100][101]In an opposing view, Tom Shone wrote that through Star Wars and Jaws, Lucas and Spielberg "didn't betray cinema at all: they plugged it back into the grid, returning the medium to its roots as a carnival sideshow, a magic act, one big special effect", which was "a kind of rebirth".[98]In 1989, the U.S. National Film Registry of the Library of Congress selected the film as a "culturally, historically, or aesthetically important" film.[102] In 2002, Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back were voted as the greatest films ever made on Channel 4's 100 Greatest Films poll.[103] In 2006, Lucas's original screenplay was selected by the Writers Guild of America as the 68th greatest of all time.[104]American Film Institute lists:In 2011, ABC aired a primetime special, Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time, that counted down the best movies chosen by fans based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and People magazine. Star Wars was selected as the No. 1 Best Sci-Fi Film.The novelization of the film was published in December 1976, six months before the film was released. The credited author was George Lucas, but the book was revealed to have been ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster, who later wrote the first Expanded Universe novel, Splinter of the Mind's Eye. The book was first published as Star Wars: From the Adventures of Luke Skywalker; later editions were titled simply Star Wars (1995) and, later, Star Wars: A New Hope (1997), to reflect the retitling of the film. Certain scenes deleted from the film (and later restored or archived in DVD bonus features) were always present in the novel (since it had been based on the screenplay), such as Luke at Tosche Station with Biggs and the encounter between Han and Jabba (referred to as "Jabba the Hut") in Docking Bay 94. Other deleted scenes from the movie, such as a close-up of a stormtrooper riding on a Dewback, were included in a photo insert added to later printings of the book.Smaller details were also different from the film version; for example, in the Death Star assault, Luke's callsign is Blue Five instead of Red Five as in the film. Also Obi-Wan does not sacrifice himself; Vader actually defeats and executes him in the lightsaber duel. Charles Lippincott secured the deal with Del Rey Books to publish the novelization in November 1976. By February 1977, a half-million copies had been sold.[5]Lucasfilm adapted the story for a children's book-and-record set. Released in 1979, the 24-page Star Wars read-along book was accompanied by a 33 rpm 7-inch gramophone record. Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the movie with an abridged and condensed version of the story. The record was produced by Buena Vista Records, and its content copyrighted by Black Falcon, Ltd., a subsidiary of Lucasfilm "formed to handle the merchandising for Star Wars".[113]The Story of Star Wars was a 1977 record album presenting an abridged version of the events depicted in Star Wars, using dialogue and sound effects from the original film. The recording was produced by George Lucas and Alan Livingston, and was narrated by Roscoe Lee Browne. The script was adapted by E. Jack Kaplan and Cheryl Gard.A radio drama adaptation of the film was written by Brian Daley, directed by John Madden, and produced for and broadcast on the American National Public Radio network in 1981. The adaptation received cooperation from George Lucas, who donated the rights to NPR. John Williams' music and Ben Burtt's sound design were retained for the show; Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker) and Anthony Daniels (C-3PO) reprised their roles as well. The radio drama featured scenes not seen in the final cut of the film, such as Luke Skywalker's observation of the space battle above Tatooine through binoculars, a skyhopper race, and Darth Vader's interrogation of Princess Leia. In terms of Star Wars canon, the radio drama is given the highest designation (like the screenplay and novelization), G-canon.[114][115]
Cite error: There are <ref> tags on this page, but the references will not show without a {{Reflist}} template or a <references /> tag; see the help page.Mark HamillHarrison FordCarrie FisherPeter CushingAlec GuinnessPaul HirschMarcia LucasRichard ChewMay 25, 1977(1977-05-25)1 Plot2 Cast3 History

3.1 Writing
3.2 Production
3.3 Post-production

3.1 Writing3.2 Production3.3 Post-production4 Cinematic and literary allusions5 Soundtrack6 Releases

6.1 Special Edition
6.2 Home video releases
6.3 3D re-release

6.1 Special Edition6.2 Home video releases6.3 3D re-release7 Reaction

7.1 Critical response
7.2 Awards
7.3 Cinematic influence
7.4 Honors

7.1 Critical response7.2 Awards7.3 Cinematic influence7.4 Honors8 Marketing

8.1 Novelization
8.2 Book-and-record sets
8.3 Radio drama

8.1 Novelization8.2 Book-and-record sets8.3 Radio drama9 See also10 References

10.1 Footnotes
10.2 Annotations
10.3 Bibliography

10.1 Footnotes10.2 Annotations10.3 Bibliography11 Further reading12 External links3.1 Writing3.2 Production3.3 Post-production6.1 Special Edition6.2 Home video releases6.3 3D re-release7.1 Critical response7.2 Awards7.3 Cinematic influence7.4 Honors8.1 Novelization8.2 Book-and-record sets8.3 Radio drama10.1 Footnotes10.2 Annotations10.3 BibliographyMark Hamill as Luke Skywalker: Luke is a young man who was raised by his aunt and uncle on the remote, desert world Tatooine. He dreams of something greater than his current position in life and eventually finds it. This is Hamill's film debut.Harrison Ford as Han Solo: Han is a cynical smuggler whom Luke and Obi-Wan meet at the Mos Eisley Cantina. They hire him to take them to Alderaan in his ship, the Millennium Falcon, which is co-piloted by Chewbacca.Carrie Fisher as Princess Leia Organa: Leia is a member of the Imperial Senate and a leader of the Rebel Alliance. She plans to use the stolen Death Star plans to find the station's weakness.Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan "Ben" Kenobi: Obi-Wan is an aging man who served as a Jedi Knight and then Jedi Master during the Clone Wars. Early in the film, Kenobi introduces Luke to the Force.Peter Cushing as Grand Moff Tarkin: Tarkin is the commander of the Death Star and a Regional Governor of the Galaxy. He leads the search for the Rebel Base, hoping to destroy it. He is the main antagonist of the film.David Prowse as Darth Vader: Vader is a Dark Lord of the Sith and a prominent figure of the Galactic Empire who hopes to destroy the Rebel Alliance. He is voiced by James Earl Jones.Anthony Daniels as C-3PO: 3PO is a protocol and interpreter droid who also falls into Luke's hands. He is rarely without his counterpart droid, R2-D2.Kenny Baker as R2-D2: R2 is an astromech droid who is carrying the Death Star plans and a secret message for Obi-Wan from Princess Leia.Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca: Chewie is Han Solo's sidekick, a 200 year old Wookiee and first mate of the Millennium Falcon.AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (1998)  #15[105]AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills (2001)  #27[106]AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains (2003):

Han Solo  No. 14 Hero[107]
Obi-Wan Kenobi  No. 37 Hero[107]
Princess Leia  Nominated Hero[108]
Luke Skywalker  Nominated Hero[108]

Han Solo  No. 14 Hero[107]Obi-Wan Kenobi  No. 37 Hero[107]Princess Leia  Nominated Hero[108]Luke Skywalker  Nominated Hero[108]AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes (2004):

"May the Force be with you."  #8[109]
"Help me, Obi-Wan Kenobi. You're my only hope."  Nominated[109]

"May the Force be with you."  #8[109]"Help me, Obi-Wan Kenobi. You're my only hope."  Nominated[109]AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores (2005)  #1[52]AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers (2006)  #39[110]AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) (2007)  #13[111]AFI's 10 Top 10 (2008)  No. 2 Sci-Fi Film[112]Han Solo  No. 14 Hero[107]Obi-Wan Kenobi  No. 37 Hero[107]Princess Leia  Nominated Hero[108]Luke Skywalker  Nominated Hero[108]"May the Force be with you."  #8[109]"Help me, Obi-Wan Kenobi. You're my only hope."  Nominated[109]Hardware Wars, a 1977 low budget parody film.Spaceballs, a 1987 comedy film directed by Mel Brooks."Blue Harvest", a 2007 episode of the comedy series Family Guy.Baxter, John (1999). Mythmaker: The Life and Work of George Lucas (1st edition). New York: William Morrow. ISBN 978-0-380-97833-5.Bouzereau, Laurent (1997). Star Wars: The Annotated Screenplays. New York: Del Rey. ISBN 0-345-40981-7.Kaminski, Michael (2008). The Secret History of Star Wars: The Art of Storytelling and the Making of a Modern Epic. Kingston, Ont.: Legacy Books Press. ISBN 978-0-9784652-3-0.Pollock, Dale (1999). Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas. New York: Da Capo Press. ISBN 0-306-80904-4.Rinzler, J. W. (2007). The Making of Star Wars. New York: Ballantine Books. ISBN 978-0-345-49476-4.Bailey, T. J. (2005). Devising a Dream: A Book of Star Wars Facts and Production Timeline. Louisville, Ky.: Wasteland Press. ISBN 1-933265-55-8.Blackman, W. Haden (2004). The New Essential Guide to Weapons and Technology, Revised Edition (Star Wars). New York: Del Rey. ISBN 0-345-44903-7.Sansweet, Stephen (1992). Star Wars: From Concept to Screen to Collectible. San Francisco: Chronicle Books. ISBN 0-8118-0101-2.Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope at StarWars.comStar Wars Episode IV: A New Hope on Wookieepedia: a Star Wars WikiStar Wars Episode IV: A New Hope at the Internet Movie DatabaseStar Wars Episode IV: A New Hope at AllRoviStar Wars Episode IV: A New Hope at Rotten TomatoesStar Wars Episode IV: A New Hope at Box Office MojoStar Wars Episode IV: A New Hope at MetacriticAll About Eve is a 1950 American drama film written and directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz, based on the 1946 short story "The Wisdom of Eve", by Mary Orr.The film stars Bette Davis as Margo Channing, a highly regarded but aging Broadway star. Anne Baxter plays Eve Harrington, a willingly helpful young fan who insinuates herself into Channing's life, ultimately threatening Channing's career and her personal relationships. George Sanders, Celeste Holm, Hugh Marlowe, Barbara Bates, Gary Merrill and Thelma Ritter also appear, and the film provided one of Marilyn Monroe's earliest important roles.Praised by critics at the time of its release, All About Eve was nominated for 14 Academy Awards (a feat unmatched until the 1997 film Titanic) and won six, including Best Picture. As of 2012, All About Eve is still the only film in Oscar history to receive four female acting nominations (Davis and Baxter as Best Actress, Holm and Ritter as Best Supporting Actress). All About Eve was selected in 1990 for preservation in the United States National Film Registry and was among the first 50 films to be registered. All About Eve appeared at #16 on AFI's 1998 list of the 100 best American films.[2]At an awards dinner, Eve Harrington (Anne Baxter) the newest and brightest star on Broadway is being presented the Sarah Siddons Award for her breakout performance as Cora in Footsteps on the Ceiling. Theatre critic Addison DeWitt (George Sanders) observes the proceedings and, in a sardonic voiceover, recalls how Eve's star rose as quickly as it did.The film flashes back a year. Margo Channing (Bette Davis) is one of the biggest stars on Broadway, but despite her success she is bemoaning her age, having just turned forty and knowing what that will mean for her career. After a performance one night, Margo's close friend Karen Richards (Celeste Holm), wife of the play's author Lloyd Richards (Hugh Marlowe), meets besotted fan Eve Harrington in the cold alley outside the stage door. Recognizing her from having passed her many times in the alley (as Eve claims to have seen every performance of Margo's current play, Aged in Wood), Karen takes her backstage to meet Margo. Eve tells the group gathered in Margo's dressing room Karen and Lloyd, Margo's boyfriend Bill Sampson (Gary Merrill), a director who is eight years her junior, and Margo's maid Birdie (Thelma Ritter) that she followed Margo's last theatrical tour to New York after seeing her in a play in San Francisco. She tells a moving and involving story of a difficult life, including losing her young husband in the recent war. She is becomingly humble and flattering in her idolization of Margo. In response, Margo quickly befriends Eve, moves her into her home, and takes her on as her assistant, leaving Birdie, who instinctively dislikes Eve, feeling put out.While maintaining a seamless outward appearance of humility and of a desire only to serve, Eve is gradually shown to be working to supplant Margo, scheming to become her understudy behind her back (driving wedges between Margo and Lloyd and between Margo and Bill) and conspiring with an unsuspecting Karen to cause Margo to miss a performance. Eve, knowing in advance that she will be the one appearing that night, invites the city's theatre critics to attend that evening's performance, which is a triumph for her. Eve tries to seduce Bill, but he rejects her. Following a scathing newspaper column by Addison, Margo and Bill reconcile, dine with the Richardses, and decide to marry. That same night at the restaurant, Eve blackmails Karen into telling Lloyd to give her the part of Cora, by threatening to tell Margo of Karen's role in Margo's missed performance. Before Karen can talk with Lloyd, Margo announces to everyone's surprise that she does not wish to play Cora and would prefer to continue in Aged in Wood. Eve secures the role and attempts to climb higher by using Addison, who is beginning to doubt her. Just before the premiere of her play at the Shubert in New Haven, Eve presents Addison with her next plan: to marry Lloyd, who, she claims, has come to her professing his love and his eagerness to leave his wife for her. Now, Eve exults, Lloyd will write brilliant plays showcasing her. Addison is infuriated that Eve has attempted to use him and reveals that he knows that her back story is all lies. Her real name is Gertrude Slojinski, and she is no war widow, no orphan, no follower of Margo's tour. Before meeting Margo, she had been paid to leave town over her affair with her boss, a brewer in Wisconsin. Addison blackmails Eve, informing her that she will not be marrying Lloyd or anyone else; in exchange for Addison's silence, she now "belongs" to him.The film returns to the opening scene in which Eve, now a shining Broadway star headed for Hollywood, is presented with her award. In her speech, she thanks Margo and Bill and Lloyd and Karen with characteristic effusion, while all four stare back at her coldly. After the awards ceremony, Eve hands her award to Addison, skips a party in her honor, and returns home alone, where she encounters a young fana high-school girlwho has slipped into her apartment and fallen asleep. The young girl professes her adoration and begins at once to insinuate herself into Eve's life, offering to pack Eve's trunk for Hollywood and being accepted. "Phoebe" (Barbara Bates), as she calls herself, answers the door to find Addison returning with Eve's award. In a revealing moment, the young girl flirts daringly with the older man. Addison hands over the award to Phoebe and leaves without entering. Phoebe then lies to Eve, telling her it was only a cab driver who dropped off the award. While Eve rests in the other room, Phoebe dons Eve's elegant costume robe and poses in front of a multi-paned mirror, holding the award as if it were a crown. The mirrors transform Phoebe into multiple images of herself, and she bows regally, as if accepting the award to thunderous applause, while triumphant music plays.The story of All About Eve originated in an anecdote related to Mary Orr by actress Elisabeth Bergner. While performing in The Two Mrs. Carrolls during 1943 and 1944, Bergner allowed a young fan to become part of her household and employed her as an assistant, but later regretted her generosity when the woman attempted to undermine her. Referring to her only as "the terrible girl," Bergner related the events to Orr, who used it as the basis for her short story "The Wisdom of Eve" (1946). In the story, Orr gives the girl a more ruthless character and allows her to succeed in stealing the career of the older actress. Bergner later confirmed the basis of the story in her autobiography Bewundert viel, und viel gescholten (Greatly Admired and Greatly Scolded).In 1949, Mankiewicz was considering a story about an aging actress and, upon reading "The Wisdom of Eve," felt the conniving girl would be a useful added element. He sent a memo to Darryl F. Zanuck saying it "fits in with an original idea [of mine] and can be combined. Superb starring role for Susan Hayward." Mankiewicz presented a film treatment of the combined stories under the title Best Performance. He changed the main character's name from Margola Cranston to Margo Channing and retained several of Orr's characters, Eve Harrington, Lloyd and Karen Richards, and Miss Casswell, while removing Margo Channing's husband completely and replacing him with a new character, Bill Sampson. The intention was to depict Channing in a new relationship and allow Eve Harrington to threaten both Channing's professional and personal lives. Mankiewicz also added the characters Addison DeWitt, Birdie Coonan, Max Fabian, and Phoebe.Zanuck was enthusiastic and provided numerous suggestions for improving the screenplay. In some sections he felt Mankiewicz's writing lacked subtlety or provided excessive detail. He suggested diluting Birdie Coonan's jealousy of Eve so the audience would not recognize Eve as a villain until much later in the story. Zanuck reduced the screenplay by about 50 pages and chose the title All About Eve from the opening scenes in which Addison DeWitt says he will soon tell "more of Eve ... All about Eve, in fact."[3]Bette Davis was cast as Margo Channing after Claudette Colbert severely injured her back and was forced to withdraw shortly before filming began.[4]Davis, who had recently ended an 18-year association with Warner Brothers after several poorly received films, later commented she had read the script in one sitting and immediately accepted the role after realizing it was one of the best she had ever read. Channing had originally been conceived as genteel and knowingly humorous, but with the casting of Davis, Mankiewicz revised the character to be more abrasive. Among other actresses considered before Colbert were Mankiewicz's original inspiration, Susan Hayward, rejected by Zanuck as "too young," Marlene Dietrich, dismissed as "too German," and Gertrude Lawrence, who was ruled out of contention when her lawyer insisted that Lawrence not have to drink or smoke in the film, and that the script would be rewritten to allow her to sing a torch song.[4] Zanuck favored Barbara Stanwyck, but she was not available. Tallulah Bankhead and Ingrid Bergman were also considered. Joan Crawford was also considered for the part[5] but Crawford was already working on the film The Damned Don't Cry. Mankiewicz praised Davis for both her professionalism and the calibre of her performance, but in later years continued to discuss how Colbert would have played the role.Anne Baxter had spent a decade in supporting roles and had won the 1946 Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for The Razor's Edge. She got the role of Eve Harrington after the first choice, Jeanne Crain, became pregnant. Crain was at the height of her popularity and had established a career playing likable heroines; Zanuck believed she lacked the "bitch virtuosity" required by the part, and audiences would not accept her as a deceitful character.The role of Bill Sampson was originally intended for John Garfield or Ronald Reagan. Reagan's future wife Nancy Davis was considered for Karen Richards and Jose Ferrer for Addison DeWitt. Zsa Zsa Gabor actively sought the role of Phoebe without realizing the producers were considering her, along with Angela Lansbury, for Miss Casswell.[citation needed]Mankiewicz greatly admired Thelma Ritter and wrote the character of Birdie Coonan for her after working with her on A Letter to Three Wives in 1949. As Coonan was the only one immediately suspicious of Eve Harrington, he was confident Ritter would contribute a shrewd characterisation casting doubt on Harrington and providing a counterpoint to the more "theatrical" personalities of the other characters. Marilyn Monroe, relatively unknown at the time, was cast as Miss Casswell, referred to by DeWitt as a "graduate of the Copacabana School of Dramatic Art." Monroe got the part after a lobbying campaign by her agent,[6] despite Zanuck's initial antipathy and belief she was better suited to comedy.[citation needed] Angela Lansbury had been originally considered for the role.[6] The inexperienced Monroe was cowed by Bette Davis, and took 11 takes to complete the scene in the theatre lobby with the star; when Davis barked at her, Monroe left the set to vomit.[6] Smaller roles were filled by Gregory Ratoff as the producer Max Fabian, Barbara Bates as Phoebe, a young fan of Eve Harrington, and Walter Hampden as the master of ceremonies at an award presentation.[3]All About Eve received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics upon its release on October 13, 1950 at a New York City premiere. The film's competitor, Sunset Boulevard, released the same year, drew similar praise, and the two were often favorably compared. Film critic Bosley Crowther loved the film, stating it was "a fine Darryl Zanuck production, excellent music and on air ultra-class complete the superior satire".Film critic Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun Times has praised the film, saying Bette Davis' character "veteran actress Margo Channing in All About Eve was her greatest role".[7] A collection of reviews from the film's release are stored on the website Rottentomatoes.com, and All About Eve has garnered 100% positive reviews there, making it "Certified fresh." Boxoffice.com stated that it "is a classic of the American cinema to this day the quintessential depiction of ruthless ambition in the entertainment industry, with legendary performances from Bette Davis, Anne Baxter and George Sanders anchoring one of the very best films from one of Hollywood's very best Golden Era filmmakers: Joseph L. Mankiewicz. It is a film that belongs on every collector's shelf whether on video or DVD. It is a classic that deserves better than what Fox has given it."[8]Critics and academics have delineated various themes in the film. Rebecca Flint Marx, in her Allmovie review, notes the antagonism that existed between Broadway and Hollywood at the time, stating that the "script summoned into existence a whole array of painfully recognizable theatre types, from the aging, egomaniacal grand dame to the outwardly docile, inwardly scheming ingenue to the powerful critic who reeks of malignant charm."[9] Roger Ebert, in his online review, says Eve Harrington is "a universal type", and focuses on the aging actress plot line, comparing the film to Sunset Boulevard.[10] Similarly, Marc Lee's 2006 review of the film for The Daily Telegraph describes a subtext "into the darker corners of show business, exposing its inherent ageism, especially when it comes to female stars."[11] Kathleen Woodward's 1999 book, Figuring Age: Women, Bodies, Generations (Theories of Contemporary Culture), also discusses themes that appeared in many of the "aging actress" films of the 1950s and 1960s, including All About Eve. She reasons that Margo has three options: "To continue to work, she can perform the role of a young woman, one she no longer seems that interested in. She can take up the position of the angry bitch, the drama queen who holds court (the deliberate camp that Sontag finds in this film). Or she can accept her culture's gendered discourse of aging which figures her as in her moment of fading. Margo ultimately chooses the latter option, accepting her position as one of loss."[12]Professor Robert J. Corber, an expert on homophobia within the cultural context of the Cold War in the United States, posits that the foundational theme in All About Eve is that the defense of the norms of heterosexuality, specifically in terms of patriarchal marriage, must be upheld in the face of challenges from female agency and homosexuality.[13] The nurturing heterosexual relationships of Margo and Bill and of Karen and Lloyd serve to contrast with the loveless relationship predation and sterile careerism of the homosexual characters, Eve and Addison.[14] Eve uses her physical femininity as a weapon to try to break up the marriages of both couples, and the extreme cynicism of Addison serves as a model of Eve's future. For instance, shortly after Eve had a phone call placed to Lloyd Richards in an attempt to break up his marriage, she was shown walking up to her room with her female co-conspirator, their arms about one another and each of them dressed for bed. Even film reviewer Kenneth Geist, despite being critical of the emphasis that Sam Staggs' book All About All About Eve places on the film's homosexual elements, nonetheless acknowledged that Eve's lesbianism seemed apparent, and not just in that scene; specifically, Geist states that "manifestations of Eves lesbianism are only twice briefly discernible".[15] Geist asserted that Mankiewicz "was highly contemptuous of both male and female homosexuals",[15] although Mankiewicz himself suggested otherwise in an interview in which he argued that society should "drop its vendetta against them".[16]Homosexuality was often linked to Communism during the Cold War's Lavender Scare and critics have written about film's subtle, yet central, Cold War narrative. The fair amount of subtlety employed in All About Eve is seen as primarily being due to Production Code restrictions on the depiction of homosexuals in the media during this time.[13][17] However, notwithstanding those restrictions, Corber cites the film as but one example of a recurrent theme within American film of the homosexual as an emotionally bereft predator.[13] The documentary The Celluloid Closet also affirms this theme to which Corber refers, including citing numerous other film examples from the same Production Code time period in which All About Eve was made.[13][18]Another important thematic of the film, in terms of war politics and sexuality, involves the post-World War II pressure placed upon women to acquiesce agency. This pressure to resume "traditional" female roles is especially illustrated in this film in the contrast between Margo's mockery of Karen Richards for being a "happy little housewife" and her lengthy and inspired monologue, as a reformed woman later, about the virtuousness of marriage, including how a woman is not truly a woman without having a man beside her. This submissive and effeminate Margo is contrasted with the theatricality, combativeness, and egotism of the earlier career woman Margo, and the film's two homosexual characters. Margo quips that Eve should place her award "where her heart should be", and Eve is shown bereft at the end of the film. At dinner, the two married couples see Eve and Addison in a similarly negative light, with Margo wondering aloud what schemes Eve was constructing in her "feverish little brain". Additionally, Eve's utility as a personal assistant to Margo early in the film, which is a subtle construct of a same-sex intimate relationship, is decried by Birdie, the same working-class character who immediately saw through Eve's story about a fictional husband. Birdie sees such agency as being unnatural, and the film contrasts its predatory nature ("studying you like a blueprint") with the love and warmth of her later reliance upon Bill. The pressure to acquiesce agency and more highly value patriarchy, following the return of men from the war, after having been shown propaganda promoting agency such as Rosie the Riveter and after having occupied traditionally male roles such as bomb-building factory worker, was deemed "the problem that has no name" by well-known feminist Betty Friedan.[19]Despite what critics such as Corber have described as the homophobia pervasive in the movie,[13] All About Eve has long been a favored film among gay audiences, likely due to its campy overtones (in part due to the casting of Davis) and its general sophistication. Davis, who long had a strong gay fan base, expressed support for gay men in her 1972 interview with The Advocate.[20][21][22]The film won six Academy Awards.[23]In 1990, All About Eve was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."[26] The film received in 1997 a placement on the Producers Guild of America Hall of Fame. The film also earns a 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.American Film Institute ListsWhen AFI named Bette Davis # 2 on its list of the greatest female American screen legends, All About Eve was the film selected to highlight Davis' legendary career. (Marilyn Monroe, who makes a brief appearance in Eve, ranked # 6 on the screen legends list.)The film opens with the image of a fictitious award trophy, described by DeWitt as the "highest honor our theater knows: the Sarah Siddons Award for Distinguished Achievement." In 1952, a small group of distinguished Chicago theater-goers began to give an award with that name, which was sculpted to look like the one used in the film. It has been given annually, with past honorees including Bette Davis and Celeste Holm.A radio version of All About Eve starring Tallulah Bankhead as Margo Channing was presented on NBC's The Big Show by the Theatre Guild of the Air on November 16, 1952.[27] The production is notable in that Mary Orr, the writer of the original short story that formed the basis for the original film, played the role of Karen Richards. The cast also featured Alan Hewitt as Addison DeWitt (who narrated), Beatrice Pearson as Eve Harrington, Don Briggs as Lloyd Richards, Kevin McCarthy as Bill Samson, Florence Robinson as Birdie Coonan, and Stefan Schnabel as Max Fabian.[27]In 1970, All About Eve was the inspiration for the stage musical Applause, with book by Betty Comden and Adolph Green, lyrics by Lee Adams, and music by Charles Strouse. The original production starred Lauren Bacall as Margo Channing, and it won the Tony Award for Best Musical that season. It ran for four previews and 896 performances at the Palace Theatre on Broadway. After Bacall left the production, she was replaced by Anne Baxter in the role of Margo Channing.Streaming audioOctober 13, 1950(1950-10-13)1 Plot2 Production

2.1 Origin
2.2 Casting and characters
2.3 Cast

2.1 Origin2.2 Casting and characters2.3 Cast3 Response

3.1 Critical reaction
3.2 Thematic content

3.1 Critical reaction3.2 Thematic content4 Awards and honors

4.1 Academy Awards
4.2 Golden Globe Awards
4.3 NY Film Critics Circle Awards
4.4 Directors Guild of America Awards
4.5 Cannes Film Festival
4.6 British Academy of Film and Television Arts
4.7 Later recognition and rankings
4.8 Sarah Siddons Award

4.1 Academy Awards4.2 Golden Globe Awards4.3 NY Film Critics Circle Awards4.4 Directors Guild of America Awards4.5 Cannes Film Festival4.6 British Academy of Film and Television Arts4.7 Later recognition and rankings4.8 Sarah Siddons Award5 Adaptations6 In popular culture7 References8 External links2.1 Origin2.2 Casting and characters2.3 Cast3.1 Critical reaction3.2 Thematic content4.1 Academy Awards4.2 Golden Globe Awards4.3 NY Film Critics Circle Awards4.4 Directors Guild of America Awards4.5 Cannes Film Festival4.6 British Academy of Film and Television Arts4.7 Later recognition and rankings4.8 Sarah Siddons AwardBette Davis as Margo ChanningAnne Baxter as Eve HarringtonGeorge Sanders as Addison DeWittCeleste Holm as Karen RichardsGary Merrill as Bill SampsonHugh Marlowe as Lloyd RichardsThelma Ritter as BirdieGregory Ratoff as Max FabianMarilyn Monroe as Miss CasswellBarbara Bates as PhoebeBest Picture20th Century-Fox (Darryl F. Zanuck, producer)Best Supporting ActorGeorge SandersBest Costume Design for a Black-and-White filmEdith Head and Charles Le MaireBest DirectorJoseph L. MankiewiczBest Writing, ScreenplayJoseph L. MankiewiczBest Sound RecordingThomas T. MoultonNominated: Best Leading ActressAnne BaxterNominated: Best Leading ActressBette DavisNominated: Best Supporting ActressCeleste HolmNominated: Best Supporting ActressThelma RitterNominated: Best Set Direction for a Black-and-White filmGeorge W. Davis, Thomas Little, Walter M. Scott, and Lyle R. WheelerNominated: Best Cinematography for a Black-and-White filmMilton R. KrassnerNominated: Best Film EditingBarbara McLeanNominated: Best Music ScoreAlfred Newman[24]Best Motion Picture ScreenplayJoseph L. MankiewiczNominated: Best Drama Motion PictureDarryl F. Zanuck, producerNominated: Best Drama Motion Picture ActressBette DavisNominated: Best Motion Picture DirectorJoseph L. MankiewiczNominated: Best Supporting Actor in a Motion PictureGeorge SandersNominated: Best Supporting Actress in a Motion PictureThelma RitterBest Motion PictureDarryl F. ZanuckBest DirectorJoseph L. MankiewiczBest ActressBette DavisOutstanding Directorial Achievement in a Motion PictureJoseph L. MankiewiczBest Actress PrizeBette DavisJury Special PrizeJoseph L. MankiewiczNominated: Grand Prize of the FestivalJoseph L. Mankiewicz[25]Best Film from any SourceDarryl F. ZanuckAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies#16AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains

Eve Harrington#23 Villain

Eve Harrington#23 VillainAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Fasten your seatbelts. It's going to be a bumpy night"#9

"Fasten your seatbelts. It's going to be a bumpy night"#9AFI's 100 Years of Film ScoresNominatedAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)#28Eve Harrington#23 Villain"Fasten your seatbelts. It's going to be a bumpy night"#9The plot of the film has been used numerous times, frequently as an outright homage to the film, with one notable example being a 1974 episode of The Mary Tyler Moore Show, "A New Sue Ann". In the episode, the character of Sue Ann Nivens (Betty White), hostess of a popular local cooking show, hires a young, pretty and very eager fan as her apprentice and assistant, but the neophyte quickly begins to sabotage her mentor, in an attempt to replace her as host of the show. Sue Ann, however, unlike Margo Channing, prevails in the end, countering the young woman's attempts to steal her success and sending her on her way.[28]The rock band of the same name got its name when lead singer Julianne Regan and (then) drummer Manuela Zwingmann saw the film for the first time at the former's parents' house in 1985.A 2008 episode of The Simpsons, "All About Lisa", is influenced by this film. In the episode, Lisa becomes Krusty the Clown's assistant, eventually taking his place on television and receiving an entertainment award.[29]Pedro Almodovar's 1999 Academy Award-winning Spanish language film, Todo sobre mi madre (All About My Mother), has elements similar to those found in All About Eve. The title of the film itself is an homage to the 1950 film. In the first scene, the character of Manuela and her son, Esteban, are watching a dubbed version of the movie on television when the film is introduced as "Eve Unveiled." Esteban comments that the film should be called "Todo Sobre Eva" ("All About Eva"). Later in the scene, he begins writing about his mother in his notebook and calls the piece "Todo sobre Eva." Also in All About My Mother, Manuela replaces Nina Cruz as Stella for a night in a production of A Streetcar Named Desire, leading a furious Nina to accuse her of learning the part "just like Eve Harrington!"In a season 3 episode of Gossip Girl, titled "Enough About Eve", Blair has a dream where she is Margo Channing.In the fifth season of The L Word, a fan becomes Jenny's assistant while she is directing a movie; later the fan blackmails the movie studio into letting her direct and she proceeds to take over Jenny's life.In the second season of Glee, Kurt Hummel calls his fellow glee club member Santana Lopez "a Latina Eve Harrington", after learning she is blackmailing closeted jock Dave Karofsky into becoming her "beard" and running mate for Prom Queen and King.In the first season of Will & Grace, Grace becomes dependent on a maid to give her a confidence boost during a design competition. This prompts her drunken assistant Karen to suspect a plot and she confronts the maid, exclaiming "I've seen 'All About Eve'. Poooor Eve!"In the pilot episode of Political Animals, when Susan suspects Georgia, a fellow reporter, has a crush on her boyfriend and is attempting to outshine her at the newspaper, she says, "If Eve Harrington were an actual person today, she would look like Georgia. She would bake cupcakes, and she would have a blog."All About Eve Script from Internet Movie Script DatabaseAll About Eve at the Internet Movie DatabaseAll About Eve at the TCM Movie DatabaseAll About Eve at AllRoviAll About Eve at Rotten TomatoesAll About Eve on Filmsite.orgLiterature on All About EveAll About Eve on Lux Radio Theater: October 1, 1951All About Eve on Theater Guild on the Air: November 16, 1952The African Queen is a 1951 adventure film adapted from the 1935 novel of the same name by C. S. Forester.[3] The film was directed by John Huston and produced by Sam Spiegel[4] and John Woolf. The screenplay was adapted by James Agee, John Huston, John Collier and Peter Viertel. It was photographed in Technicolor by Jack Cardiff and had a music score by Allan Gray. The film stars Humphrey Bogart (who won the Academy Award for Best Actor  his only Oscar), and Katharine Hepburn with Robert Morley, Peter Bull, Walter Gotell, Richard Marner and Theodore Bikel.[5]The African Queen has been selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry, with the Library of Congress deeming it "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant".The film currently holds a 100% "Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 37 reviews.[6]Robert Morley and Katharine Hepburn play Samuel and Rose Sayer, brother and sister British Methodist missionaries in the village of Kungdu in German East Africa at the beginning of World War I in August/September 1914. Their mail and supplies are delivered by the rough-and-ready Canadian boat captain Charlie Allnut (Humphrey Bogart) of the African Queen, whose coarse behaviour they tolerate in a rather stiff manner.When Charlie warns them that war has broken out between Germany and Britain, the Sayers choose to stay on, only to witness the Germans burning down the mission village and herding the villagers away. When Samuel protests, he is beaten by a German soldier. After the Germans leave, Samuel becomes delirious with fever and soon dies. Charlie returns shortly afterward. He helps Rose bury her brother, and they set off in the African Queen.In discussing their situation, Charlie mentions to Rose that the Germans have a gunboat, the Queen Louisa (actually Knigin Luise in German), which patrols a large lake downriver, effectively blocking any British counter-attacks. Rose comes up with a plan to convert the Queen into a torpedo boat, and sink the Louisa. Charlie points out that navigating the river would be suicidal: to reach the lake they would have to pass a German fort and negotiate several dangerous rapids. But Rose is insistent and eventually persuades him to go along with the plan.Charlie hoped after passing the first obstacle that Rose would be discouraged, but she is confident they can handle what is yet to come, and argues that Charlie promised to go all the way. During their journey down the river, Charlie, Rose and the African Queen encounter many obstacles, including the German fort and three sets of rapids. The first set of rapids is rather easy; they get through with minimal flooding in the boat. But Rose and Charlie have to duck down when they pass the fortress and the soldiers begin shooting at them, blowing two bullet holes in the top of the boiler and causing one of the steam pressure hoses to disconnect from the boiler, which in turn, causes the boat's engine to stop running. Luckily, Charlie manages to reattach the hose to the boiler just as they are about to enter the second set of rapids. The boat rolls and pitches crazily as it goes down the rapids, leading to more severe flooding in the boat and also collapsing the stern canopy.While celebrating their success, the two find themselves in an embrace. Embarrassed, they break off, but eventually succumb and strike up a relationship. The couple decide to take a pit stop to gather more fuel and drain the boat. Back on the river, Charlie and Rose watch crocodiles frolic on the nearby river bank when the third set of rapids comes up. This time, there is a loud metallic clattering noise as the boat goes over the falls. Once again, the couple dock on the river bank to check for damage. When Charlie dives under the boat, he finds the propeller shaft bent sideways and a blade missing from the propeller. Luckily, with some expert skills and using suggestions from Rose, Charlie manages to straighten the shaft and weld a new blade on to the propeller, and they are off again.All appears lost when Charlie and Rose "lose the channel" and the boat becomes mired in the mud amid dense reeds near the mouth of the river. First, they try to tow the boat through the muck, only to have Charlie come out of the water covered with leeches. All their efforts to free the African Queen fail. With no supplies left and short of potable water, Rose and a feverish Charlie turn in, convinced they have no hope of survival. Before going to sleep Rose prays that she and Charlie be admitted into Heaven. As they sleep, exhausted and beaten, heavy rains raise the river's level and float the Queen off of the mud and into the lake which, it turns out, is just a short distance from their location. Once on the lake, they narrowly avoid being spotted by the Louisa.That night, they set about converting some oxygen cylinders into torpedoes using gelatin explosives and improvised detonators that use nails as the firing pins for rifle cartridges. They then attach the torpedoes through the bow of the Queen. At the height of a storm, they push the Queen out onto the lake, intending to set it on a collision course with the Louisa. Unfortunately, the holes in the bow in which the torpedoes were pushed through are not sealed, allowing water to pour into the boat, causing it to sink lower and eventually the Queen tips over.Charlie is captured and taken aboard the Louisa, where he is questioned by the captain. Believing Rose to have drowned, he makes no attempt to defend himself against accusations of spying and is sentenced to death by hanging. However, Rose is captured too and Charlie hollers her name, then pretends not to know her. The captain questions her, and Rose confesses the whole plot proudly, deciding they have nothing to lose anyway. The captain sentences her too to be executed as a spy. Charlie asks the German captain to marry them before executing them. After a brief marriage ceremony, the Germans prepare to hang them, when there is a sudden explosion and the Louisa starts to sink. The Louisa has struck the overturned hull of the African Queen and detonated the torpedoes. Rose's plan has worked, if a little belatedly, and the newly married couple swim to safety in Kenya.Production censors objected to several aspects of the original script, which included the two characters cohabiting without the formality of marriage. Some changes were made before the film was completed.[7] Another change followed the casting of Bogart; his character's lines in the original screenplay were rendered with a thick Cockney dialect but the script had to be completely rewritten because the actor was unable to reproduce it.The film was partially financed by John and James Woolf of Romulus Films, a British company. The Woolf brothers' were so pleased with the completed movie that they talked John Huston into directing their next picture, Moulin Rouge (1952).Much of the film was shot on location in Uganda and the Congo in Africa. This was rather novel for the time, especially for a technicolor picture which utilized large unwieldy cameras. The cast and crew endured sickness, and spartan living conditions during their time on location. In one scene, Hepburn was playing a piano but had a bucket nearby because she was often sick between takes. Bogart later bragged that he was the only one to escape illness, which he credited to not drinking any water on location, but instead fortifying himself from the large supply of whiskey he had brought along with him.About half of the film was shot in England. For instance, the scenes in which Bogart and Hepburn are seen in the water were all shot in studio tanks at Isleworth Studios, Middlesex. These scenes were considered too dangerous to shoot in Africa. All of the foreground plates for the process shots were also done in studio.[8]The scenes in the reed-filled riverbank were filmed in Dalyan, Turkey. [9]Most of the action takes place aboard a boat  the African Queen of the title  and scenes on board the boat were filmed using a large raft with a mockup of the boat on top. Sections of the boat set could be removed to make room for the large Technicolor camera. This proved hazardous on one occasion when the boat's boiler  a heavy copper replica  almost fell on Hepburn. It was not bolted down since it also had to be moved to accommodate the camera. The small steam-boat used in the film to depict the African Queen was built in 1912, in England, for service in Africa, and is now on display at Key Largo in Florida, USA. At one time it was owned by actor Fess Parker.[10] In December 2011, plans were announced to restore the boat.[11] Restoration was completed by the following April and the African Queen is now a tourist attraction in the Florida Keys.[12]Because of the dangers involved with shooting the rapid scenes, a model was created at the studio tank in London.The film also features a German gunboat, the Knigin Luise, which is based on the former World War I vessel MV Liemba (known until 1924 as the Graf von Gtzen), which was scuttled in 1916 during the Battle for Lake Tanganyika, but was subsequently refloated by the British and continues to operate as a passenger ferry to this day. The actual vessel used in the film to portray the Louisa was the steam tug Buganda, owned and operated on Lake Victoria by East African Railways & Harbours.The African Queen opened on December 23, 1951 in Los Angeles, in order to qualify for the 1951 Oscars, and on February 20, 1952 at the Capitol Theatre in New York City.The film earned an estimated 256,267 at UK cinemas in 1952,[13] making it the 11th most popular movie of the year.[14] It earned an estimated $4 million at the US and Canadian box office.[15]American Film Institute recognitionAFI has also honored both Humphrey Bogart and Katharine Hepburn as the greatest American screen legends.The film has been released on Region 2 DVD in the United Kingdom, Germany and Scandinavia.The British DVD includes a theatrical trailer and an audio commentary by cinematographer Cardiff in which he details many of the hardships and challenges involved in filming in Africa. The picture quality is somewhat grainy and suffers from colour shifts; the sound lacks bass response and suffers from clicks and pops.Prior to 2010, the film had been released in the United States on VHS video, laserdisc and as a region 1 DVD. A region 1 DVD is available and distributed by the Castaways Pictures and has English and Chinese subtitles available with no other features. It is not clear if this is authorised or not. While Granada International holds international rights, the U.S. rights are held by Paramount Pictures, who inherited the rights to the film when Viacom (who had acquired the rights from copyright holder Horizon Film Management in the 1970s) purchased the studio in 1994. For many years, 20th Century Fox had U.S. video rights (through CBS/Fox Video) until they reverted to Paramount in 1997. The version distributed by Castaways Pictures has atrocious English subtitles that in many instances obliterate the meaning of the actual dialog. For instance, consider this exchange between Charlie and Rosie (Bogart and Hepburn) as they argue about who will be aboard the African Queen and who will go ashorewith the subtitles as they appear in the Castaways version given in brackets: Hepburn: "Who do you think you are, ordering me about?" [Who do you think you're ordering me about] Bogart: "I'm the captain, that's who, and I ain't taking you along." [I'm the captain asshole and I won't take you]. Similar butchering appears in the subtitles throughout this version of the film.US TV rights have changed hands several times over the years  from Viacom Enterprises, to Paramount Domestic Television, CBS Paramount Domestic Television, CBS Television Distribution and finally to Trifecta Entertainment & Media, which currently distributes the film under license from Paramount. It can often be found on either Turner Classic Movies or pay-per-view.In 2009, Paramount completed restoration work for region 1 and a 4K digitally restored version was issued on DVD and Blu-ray March 23, 2010. The film was restored in its original mono soundtrack from original UK film elements under the sole supervision of Paramount, and had as an extra a documentary on the film's production, Embracing Chaos: The Making of The African Queen. According to Ron Smith, vice president of restoration for Paramount Pictures, the major factor that led to the holdup were difficulties locating the original negative.[16] Romulus Films and international rights holder ITV Global Entertainment were acknowledged in the restoration credits.ITV released the restoration in Region 2 on June 14, 2010.The African Queen was adapted as a one-hour radio play on the December 15, 1952 broadcast of Lux Radio Theater with Humphrey Bogart reprising his film role and joined by Greer Garson. This broadcast is included as a bonus CD in the Commemorative Box Set version of the Paramount DVD.An elliptic commentary on the making of The African Queen can be found in the 1990 film White Hunter Black Heart, directed by Clint Eastwood.February 20, 1952(1952-02-20)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Premiere5 Awards and honours

5.1 Academy Awards
5.2 Others

5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Others6 Subsequent releases and rights issues

6.1 2009 digital restoration

6.1 2009 digital restoration7 Adaptations to other media8 References

8.1 Notes
8.2 Bibliography

8.1 Notes8.2 Bibliography9 External links5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Others6.1 2009 digital restoration8.1 Notes8.2 BibliographyHumphrey Bogart as Charlie AllnutKatharine Hepburn as Rose SayerRobert Morley as Rev. Samuel SayerPeter Bull as Captain of LouisaTheodore Bikel as the First OfficerWalter Gotell as the Second OfficerPeter Swanwick as the First Officer of ShonaRichard Marner as the Second Officer of Shona1998  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  #172002  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions  #142006  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers  #482007  AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #65Farwell, Byron. The Great War in Africa, 19141918. 2nd ed. New York City: W. W. Norton & Company, 1989.Foden, Giles (2005). "Mimi and Toutou Go Forth: The Bizarre Battle of Lake Tanganyika". Penguin Books Ltd. ISBN 0-14-100984-5Hagberg Wright, C.T. "German Methods of Development in Africa." Journal of the Royal African Society 1.1 (1901): 2338. Historical. J-Stor. Golden Library, ENMU. 18 April. 2005 http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0368-4016%28190110%291%3A1%3C23%3AGMODIA%3E2.0.CO%3B2-LHenderson, William Otto. The German Colonial Empire. Portland: International Specialized Book Services, Inc, 1993.Hepburn, Katharine (1987). The Making of the African Queen, or: How I Went to Africa with Bogart, Bacall and Huston and Almost Lost My Mind (Knopf)Werner, A, and R Dilthey. "German and British Colonisation in Africa." Journal of the Royal African Society 4.14 (1905): 23841. Historical. J-Stor. Golden Library, ENMU. 18 April. 2005.The African Queen at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe African QueenThe African Queen on Lux Radio Theater: December 15, 1952Psycho is a 1960 American suspense/horror film directed by Alfred Hitchcock and starring Anthony Perkins, Vera Miles, John Gavin, and Janet Leigh. The screenplay by Joseph Stefano is based on the 1959 novel of the same name by Robert Bloch. The novel was loosely inspired by the crimes of Wisconsin murderer and grave robber Ed Gein,[1] who lived just 40 miles from Bloch.The film depicts the encounter between a secretary, Marion Crane (Leigh), who goes to a secluded motel after embezzling money from her employer, and the motel's disturbed owner and manager, Norman Bates (Perkins), and the aftermath of their encounter.[2]Psycho initially received mixed reviews, but outstanding box office returns prompted a re-review which was overwhelmingly positive and led to four Academy Award nominations. Psycho is now considered one of Hitchcock's best films[3] and is highly praised as a work of cinematic art by international critics. It is often ranked among the greatest films of all time and is famous for bringing in a new level of acceptable violence and sexuality in films.[4] After Hitchcock's death in 1980, Universal Studios began producing follow-ups: two sequels, a prequel,[5] a remake, and a television movie spin-off. In 1992, the film was selected to be preserved by the Library of Congress at the National Film Registry.In need of money to help her divorced boyfriend Sam Loomis (John Gavin), Marion Crane (Janet Leigh), a secretary in Phoenix, Arizona, steals $40,000 from one of her employer's clients and flees in her car. En route to Sam's California home, she parks along the road to sleep. A highway patrol officer awakens her, becomes suspicious of her agitated state and begins to follow her. When she trades her car for another one at a car dealership, he notes the new vehicle's details. By the time Marion returns to the road, there is a heavy rainstorm which prompts her to spend the night at the isolated Bates Motel rather than drive in the rain.The young owner Norman Bates (Anthony Perkins) tells Marion he rarely has customers because of his location along an older, less-traveled highway, and mentions he lives with his mother in the grim-looking house overlooking the motel. He then shyly invites Marion to have supper with him. She overhears Norman arguing with his unseen mother about his supposed sexual interest in Marion, and during the meal, Marion suggests he institutionalize his mother, making him become aggressive. He admits he would like to do so, but does not want to abandon her.Marion resolves to return to Phoenix to return the money. As she undresses in her room, Norman watches through a peephole in his office wall. After calculating how she can repay the money she has spent, Marion flushes her notes down the toilet and begins to shower. Suddenly, the shadowy figure of a woman enters the bathroom and stabs Marion to death. Norman finds the corpse, and immediately assumes that his mother committed the murder. He cleans the bathroom and places Marion's body, wrapped in the shower curtain, and all her possessionsincluding the moneyin the trunk of her car and sinks it in a nearby swamp.Shortly afterward, Sam is contacted by both Marion's sister Lila (Vera Miles) and private detective Milton Arbogast (Martin Balsam), who has been hired to find her and recover the money. Arbogast traces Marion to the motel and questions Norman, who lies unconvincingly about Marion having left weeks before. He refuses to let Arbogast talk to his mother, claiming she is ill. Arbogast calls Lila and tells her he will contact her again after hopefully questioning Norman's mother. Arbogast enters Norman's house and is attacked by the same female figure who killed Marion, who slashes his face with a large kitchen knife, causing him to fall down the stairs, and then stabs him to death. Norman confronts his mother and urges her to hide in the cellar so no one can find her. She rejects the idea and orders him out of her room. Against her will, Norman carries her down to the fruit cellar, though the viewer is not shown Norman's mother in full.When Arbogast does not call Lila, she and Sam contact the local police. Deputy Sheriff Al Chambers is perplexed to learn Arbogast saw a woman in a window, and reveals that Norman's mother had died ten years earlier. Norman had found her dead alongside her married lover; an apparent murdersuicide. When Chambers dismisses Lila and Sam's concerns over Arbogast's disappearance, the two decide to search the motel themselves. Posing as a married couple, Sam and Lila check into the motel and search Marion's cabin, where they find a scrap of paper with "$40,000" written on it. While Sam distracts Norman, Lila sneaks into the house to search for his mother. Sam suggests Norman killed Marion for the money so he could buy a new hotel. Realizing Lila is missing, Norman knocks Sam unconscious and rushes to the house. Lila sees him and hides in the cellar where she discovers the hideous mummified body of Mrs. Bates and screams. Seconds later, Norman rushes in, wearing his mother's clothes and a wig, and carrying a knife. Sam arrives just in time to overpower Bates and save Lila.After Norman's arrest, forensic psychiatrist Dr. Fred Richmond (Simon Oakland) tells Sam and Lila that Mrs. Bates is alive in Norman's fractured psyche. In life, Norman's mother was a harsh and overbearing woman who had forbidden Norman to have a life that did not involve her. After the death of Norman's father, the pair lived as though there was nobody else in the world, in an unhealthy state of emotional co-dependence. When his mother found a lover, however, Norman was consumed with jealousy and murdered both of them. Wracked with guilt, he tried to "erase the crime" by bringing his mother "back to life" in his mind. He stole her corpse and preserved the body, and developed a split personality in which the two personas  Norman and "Mother"  coexist; when he is Mother, he acts, talks and dresses as she would. Marion is revealed to have been Mother's third victim, the first two also having been attractive young women; Mother is as jealous of Norman as he is of her, and so "she" kills anyone he feels attracted to. His psychosis protects him from knowing about other crimes committed after his mother's death.Norman sits in a cell, his mind dominated by the Mother persona. She says that she will prove to the authorities that she is harmless by refusing to swat a fly on Norman's hand. He then forms a smile. Marion's car is recovered from the swamp.The success of Psycho jump-started Perkins' career, but he soon began to suffer from typecasting.[6] However, when Perkins was asked whether he would have still taken the role knowing that he would be typecast afterward, he replied with a definite "yes".[7]Until her death, Leigh continued to receive strange and sometimes threatening calls, letters, and even tapes detailing what they would like to do to Marion Crane. One letter was so "grotesque" that she passed it along to the FBI, two of whose agents visited Leigh and told her the culprits had been located and that she should notify the FBI if she received any more letters of that type.[8]Norman's mother was voiced by Paul Jasmin, Virginia Gregg, and Jeanette Nolan, who also provided some screams for Lila's discovery of the mother's corpse. The three voices were thoroughly mixed, except for the last speech, which is all Gregg's.[9]Psycho is based on the 1959 novel of the same name by Robert Bloch which in turn is based loosely on the case of convicted Wisconsin murderer Ed Gein.[10] Both Gein and Psycho's protagonist, Norman Bates, were solitary murderers in isolated rural locations. Both had deceased domineering mothers, and had sealed off one room of their house as a shrine to their mother, and both dressed in women's clothing. However, there are many differences between Bates and Ed Gein. Among others, Gein would not strictly be considered a serial killer, having officially killed only two people.[11]Peggy Robertson, Hitchcock's production assistant, read Anthony Boucher's positive review of the Bloch novel and decided to show the book to Hitchcock, even though readers at Hitchcock's home studio Paramount Pictures rejected its premise for a film. Hitchcock acquired rights to the novel for $9,500.[12] He reportedly ordered Robertson to buy up copies to keep the novel's surprises for the film.[13] Hitchcock chose to film Psycho to recover from two aborted projects with Paramount: Flamingo Feather and No Bail for the Judge. Hitchcock also faced genre competitors whose works were critically compared to his own and so wanted to film new material. The director also disliked stars' salary demands and trusted only a few people to choose prospective material, including Robertson.[14]Paramount executives did not want to produce the film and refused to provide the budget that Hitchcock received from them for previous films with the studio.[15] Hitchcock decided to plan for Psycho to be filmed quickly and inexpensively, similar to an episode of his ongoing television series Alfred Hitchcock Presents, and hired the television series crew as Shamley Productions. He proposed this cost-conscious approach to Paramount but executives again refused to finance the film, telling him their sound stages were occupied or booked even though production was known to be in a slump. Hitchcock countered with the offer to finance the film personally and to film it at Universal-International if Paramount would distribute. He also deferred his director's fee of $250,000 for a 60% ownership of the film negative. This offer was finally accepted. Hitchcock also experienced resistance from producer Herbert Coleman and Shamley Productions executive Joan Harrison, who did not think the film would be a success.[16]James P. Cavanagh, who had written some of the Alfred Hitchcock Presents television shows, wrote the original screenplay.[17] Hitchcock rejected it, saying that the story dragged and read like a television short horror story.[18] His assistant recalls that the treatment was very dull.[17] Hitchcock reluctantly agreed to meet with Stefano, who had worked on only one film before. Despite Stefano's newness to the industry, the meeting went well, and Hitchcock hired him.[17]The screenplay is relatively faithful to the novel, with a few notable adaptations by Hitchcock and Stefano. Stefano found the character of Norman Bates  who, in the book, is middle-aged, overweight, and more overtly unstable  unsympathetic, but became more intrigued when Hitchcock suggested the casting of Anthony Perkins.[18] Stefano eliminated Bates' drinking,[19] which evidently necessitated removing Bates' "becoming" the Mother personality when in a drunken stupor. Also gone is Bates' interest in spiritualism, the occult and pornography.[20] Hitchcock and Stefano elected to open the film with scenes in Marion's life, and not introduce Bates at all until 20 minutes into the film, rather than open with Bates reading a history book as Bloch does.[19] Indeed, writer Joseph W. Smith notes that, "Her story occupies only two of the novel's 17 chapters. Hitchcock and Stefano expanded this to nearly half the narrative".[21] He likewise notes there is no hotel tryst between Marion and Sam in the novel. For Stefano, the conversation between Marion and Norman in the hotel parlor in which she displays a maternal sympathy towards him makes it possible for the audience to switch their sympathies towards Norman Bates after Marion's murder.[22] When Lila Crane is looking through Norman's room, in the film she opens a book with a blank cover whose contents we do not see. In the novel these are "pathologically pornographic" illustrations. Stefano wanted to give the audience "indications that something was quite wrong, but it could not be spelled out or overdone."[22] In his book of interviews with Hitchcock, Franois Truffaut notes that the novel "cheats" by having extended conversations between Norman and "Mother" and stating what Mother is "doing" at various given moments.[23] For obvious reasons, these were omitted from the film.The first name of the female protagonist was changed from Mary to Marion, since a real Mary Crane existed in Phoenix.[24] Also changed is the novel's budding romance between Sam and Lila. Hitchcock preferred to focus the audience's attention on the solution to the mystery rather than a budding romance,[25] and Stefano thought such a relationship would make Sam Loomis seem cheap.[22] Instead of having Sam explain Norman's pathology to Lila, the film simply has a psychiatrist do the talking.[26] (Stefano was in therapy dealing with his relationship with his own mother at the time of writing the film.)[27] The novel is more violent than the film; for instance, Crane is beheaded in the shower, as opposed to being stabbed to death.[17] Minor changes include changing Marion's telltale earring found after her death to a scrap of paper that failed to flush down the toilet. This provided some shock effect, since toilets were virtually never seen on screen in the 1960s.[28] The location of Arbogast's death was moved from the foyer to the stairwell. Stefano thought this would make it easier to conceal the truth about "Mother" without tipping that something was being hidden.[29] As Janet Leigh put it, this gave Hitchcock more options for his camera.[26]Paramount, whose contract guaranteed another film by Hitchcock, did not want Hitchcock to make Psycho. Paramount was expecting No Bail for the Judge starring Audrey Hepburn, who became pregnant and had to bow out, leading Hitchcock to scrap the production. Their official stance was that the book was "too repulsive" and "impossible for films", and nothing but another of his star-studded mystery thrillers.[12][30] They did not like "anything about it at all" and denied him his usual budget.[12][30] So, Hitchcock financed the film's creation through his own Shamley Productions, shooting at Universal Studios under the Revue television unit.[15][31] Hitchcock's original Bates Motel and Psycho House movie set buildings, which were constructed on the same stage as Lon Chaney Sr.'s The Phantom of the Opera, are still standing at Universal Studios in Universal City near Hollywood and are a regular attraction on the studio's tour.[32][33] As a further result of cost cutting, Hitchcock chose to film Psycho in black and white, keeping the budget under $1,000,000.[34] Other reasons for shooting in black and white were his desire to prevent the shower scene from being too gory and his admiration for Les Diaboliques's use of black and white.[35][36]To keep costs down and because he was most comfortable around them, Hitchcock took most of his crew from his television series Alfred Hitchcock Presents, including the cinematographer, set designer, script supervisor, and first assistant director.[37] He hired regular collaborators Bernard Herrmann as music composer, George Tomasini as editor, and Saul Bass for the title design and storyboarding of the shower scene. In all, his crew cost $62,000.[38]Through the strength of his reputation, Hitchcock cast Leigh for a quarter of her usual fee, paying only $25,000 (in the 1967 book Hitchcock/Truffaut, Hitchcock said that Leigh owed Paramount one final film on her seven-year contract which she had signed in 1953).[39] His first choice, Leigh agreed after having only read the novel and making no inquiry into her salary.[24] Her co-star, Anthony Perkins, agreed to $40,000.[38] Both stars were experienced and proven box-office draws.Paramount did distribute the film, but four years later Hitchcock sold his stock in Shamley to Universal's parent company and his next six films were made at and distributed by Universal.[31] After another four years, Paramount sold all rights to Universal.[31]The film, independently produced by Hitchcock, was shot at Revue Studios,[40] the same location as his television show. Psycho was shot on a tight budget of $806,947.55,[41] beginning on November 11, 1959 and ending on February 1, 1960.[42][43] Filming started in the morning and finished by six or earlier on Thursdays (when Hitchcock and his wife would dine at Chasen's).[44] Nearly the whole film was shot with 50mm lenses on 35mm cameras. This trick closely mimicked normal human vision, which helped to further involve the audience.[45]Before shooting began in November, Hitchcock dispatched assistant director Hilton Green to Phoenix to scout locations and shoot the opening scene. The shot was supposed to be an aerial shot of Phoenix that slowly zoomed into the hotel window of a passionate Marion and Sam. Ultimately, the helicopter footage proved too shaky and had to be spliced with footage from the studio.[46] Another crew filmed day and night footage on Highway 99 between Fresno and Bakersfield, California for projection when Marion drives from Phoenix. They also provided the location shots for the scene in which she is pulled over by the highway patrolman.[46] In one street scene shot in downtown Phoenix, Christmas decorations were discovered to be visible; rather than re-shoot the footage, Hitchcock chose to add a graphic to the opening scene marking the date as "Friday, December the Eleventh".[47]Green also took photos of a prepared list of 140 locations for later reconstruction in the studio. These included many real estate offices and homes such as those belonging to Marion and her sister.[46] He also found a girl who looked just like he imagined Marion and photographed her whole wardrobe, which would enable Hitchcock to demand realistic looks from Helen Colvig, the wardrobe supervisor.[46] The look of the Bates house was modeled on Edward Hopper's painting The House by The Railroad.[48]Both the leads, Perkins and Leigh, were given freedom to interpret their roles and improvise as long as it did not involve moving the camera.[49] An example of Perkins' improvisation is Norman's habit of munching on candy corn.[50]Throughout filming, Hitchcock created and hid various versions of the "Mother corpse" prop in Leigh's dressing room closet. Leigh took the joke well, and she wondered whether it was done to keep her on edge and thus more in character or to judge which corpse would be scarier for the audience.[51]During shooting, Hitchcock was forced to uncharacteristically do retakes for some scenes. The final shot in the shower scene, which starts with an extreme close-up on Marion's eye and pulls up and out, proved very difficult for Leigh, since the water splashing in her face made her want to blink, and the cameraman had trouble as well since he had to manually focus while moving the camera.[49] Retakes were also required for the opening scene, since Hitchcock felt that Leigh and Gavin were not passionate enough.[52] Leigh had trouble saying "Not inordinately" for the real estate office scene, requiring additional retakes.[53] Lastly, the scene in which the mother is discovered required complicated coordination of the chair turning around, Miles hitting the light bulb, and a lens flare, which proved to be the sticking point. Hitchcock forced retakes until all three elements were to his satisfaction.[54]According to Hitchcock, a series of shots with Arbogast going up the stairs in the Bates house before he is stabbed were directed by Hilton Green, working with storyboard artist Saul Bass' drawings only while Hitchcock was incapacitated with the common cold. However, upon viewing the dailies of the shots, Hitchcock was forced to scrap them. He claimed they were "no good" because they did not portray "an innocent person but a sinister man who was going up those stairs".[55] Hitchcock later re-shot the scene, though a little of the cut footage made its way into the film. Filming the murder of Arbogast proved problematic owing to the overhead camera angle necessary to hide the film's twist. A camera track constructed on pulleys alongside the stairway together with a chairlike device had to be constructed and thoroughly tested over a period of weeks.[56]Alfred Hitchcock's cameo is a signature occurrence in most of his films. In Psycho, he can be seen through a window, wearing a Stetson hat, standing outside Marion Crane's office.[57] Wardrobe mistress Rita Riggs says that Hitchcock chose this scene for his cameo so that he could be in a scene with his daughter (who played one of Marion's colleagues). Others have suggested that he chose this early appearance to avoid distracting the audience.[58]The murder of Janet Leigh's character in the shower is the film's pivotal scene and one of the best-known scenes in all of cinema history. As such, it spawned numerous myths and legends. It was shot from December 17 to December 23, 1959, and features 77 different camera angles.[59] The scene "runs 3 minutes and includes 50 cuts."[60] Most of the shots are extreme close-ups, except for medium shots in the shower directly before and directly after the murder. The combination of the close shots with their short duration makes the sequence feel more subjective than it would have been if the images were presented alone or in a wider angle, an example of the technique Hitchcock described as "transferring the menace from the screen into the mind of the audience".[61]In order to capture the straight-on shot of the shower head, the camera had to be equipped with a long lens. The inner holes on the spout were blocked and the camera placed farther back, so that the water appears to be hitting the lens but actually went around and past it.[62]The soundtrack of screeching violins, violas, and cellos was an original all-strings piece by composer Bernard Herrmann entitled "The Murder." Hitchcock originally wanted the sequence (and all motel scenes) to play without music,[63] but Herrmann insisted he try it with the cue he had composed. Afterward, Hitchcock agreed that it vastly intensified the scene, and he nearly doubled Herrmann's salary.[64][65][66] The blood in the scene is in fact chocolate syrup (Bosco),[67] which shows up better on black-and-white film, and has more realistic density than stage blood.[1] The sound of the knife entering flesh was created by plunging a knife into a casaba melon.[68][69]It is sometimes claimed that Leigh was not in the shower the entire time and that a body double was used. In an interview with Roger Ebert and in the book Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho, Leigh stated that she was in the scene the entire time; Hitchcock used a live model as her stand-in only for the scenes in which Norman wraps up Marion's body in a shower curtain and places her body in the trunk of her car.[70] The 2010 book The Girl in Alfred Hitchcock's Shower by Robert Graysmith contradicts this, identifying Marli Renfro as Leigh's body double for some of the shower scenes.[71]Another popular myth is that in order for Leigh's scream in the shower to sound realistic, Hitchcock used ice-cold water. Leigh denied this on numerous occasions, saying that he was very generous with a supply of hot water.[72] All of the screams are Leigh's.[9]Another myth was that Hitchcock told Leigh only to stand in the shower, and she had no idea that her character was actually going to be murdered, causing an authentic reaction.The most notorious urban legend arising from the production of Psycho began when Saul Bass, the graphic designer who created many of the title sequences of Hitchcock's films and storyboarded some of his scenes, claimed that he had actually directed the shower scene. This claim was refuted by several people associated with the film. Leigh, who is the focus of the scene, stated, "...absolutely not! I have emphatically said this in any interview I've ever given. I've said it to his face in front of other people... I was in that shower for seven days, and, believe me, Alfred Hitchcock was right next to his camera for every one of those seventy-odd shots."[73] Hilton Green, the assistant director and cameraman, also denies Bass' claim: "There is not a shot in that movie that I didn't roll the camera for. And I can tell you I never rolled the camera for Mr. Bass."[73] Roger Ebert, a longtime admirer of Hitchcock's work, was also amused by the rumor, stating, "It seems unlikely that a perfectionist with an ego like Hitchcock's would let someone else direct such a scene."[74]However, commentators such as Stephen Rebello and Bill Krohn have established that Saul Bass did significantly contribute to the creation of that scene in his capacity as visual consultant and storyboard artist.[75] Bass is credited for the design of the opening credits, and also as "Pictorial Consultant" in the credits. When interviewing Hitchcock in 1967, Franois Truffaut asked about the extent of Bass' contribution to the film, to which Hitchcock said that Bass designed the titles as well as provided storyboards for the Arbogast murder (which he claimed to have rejected), but made no mention of Bass providing storyboards for the shower scene.[76] According to Bill Krohn's Hitchcock At Work, Bass' first claim to have directed the scene was in 1970, when he provided a magazine with 48 drawings used as storyboards as proof of his contribution.[77]Krohn's analysis of the production of Psycho in his book Hitchcock at Work, while refuting Bass' claims for directing the scene, notes that these storyboards did introduce key aspects of the final scenemost notably, the fact that the killer appears as a silhouette, and details such as the close-ups of the slashing knife, Leigh's desperate outstretched arm, the shower curtain being torn down, and the transition from the hole of the drainage pipe to Marion Crane's dead eyes. Krohn notes that this final transition is highly reminiscent of the iris titles that Bass created for Vertigo.[77]Krohn's research also notes that Hitchcock shot the scene with two cameras: one a BNC Mitchell, the other a handheld camera called an clair which Orson Welles had used in Touch of Evil (1958). In order to create an ideal montage for the greatest emotional impact on the audience, Hitchcock shot a lot of footage of this scene which he trimmed down in the editing room. He even brought a Moviola on the set to gauge the footage required. The final sequence, which his editor George Tomasini worked on with Hitchcock's advice, however did not go far beyond the basic structural elements set up by Bass' storyboards.[77]According to Donald Spoto in The Dark Side of Genius, Hitchcock's wife, Alma Reville, spotted a blooper in one of the last screenings of Psycho before its official release: after Marion was supposedly dead, one could see her blink. According to Patricia Hitchcock, talking in Laurent Bouzereau's "making of" documentary, Alma spotted that Leigh's character appeared to take a breath. In either case, the postmortem activity was edited out and was never seen by audiences.[17] Although Marion's eyes should be dilated after her death, the contact lenses necessary for this effect would have required six weeks of acclimatization to wear them, so Hitchcock decided to forgo them.[78]It is often claimed that, despite its graphic nature, the "shower scene" never once shows a knife puncturing flesh.[79][80][81] However, a frame by frame analysis of the sequence shows one shot in which the knife apparently penetrates Leigh's abdomen (actually a prosthetic prop) but it is acknowledged this could be created by lighting and reverse motion.[82] Leigh herself was so affected by this scene when she saw it, that she no longer took showers unless she absolutely had to; she would lock all the doors and windows and would leave the bathroom and shower door open.[83] She never realized until she first watched the film "how vulnerable and defenseless one is".[17]Leigh and Hitchcock fully discussed what the scene meant:Film theorist Robin Wood also discusses how the shower washes "away her guilt". He comments upon the "alienation effect" of killing off the "apparent center of the film" with which spectators had identified.[84]Hitchcock insisted that Bernard Herrmann write the score for Psycho, in spite of the composer's refusal to accept a reduced fee for the film's lower budget.[85] The resulting score, according to Christopher Palmer in The Composer in Hollywood (1990) is "perhaps Herrmann's most spectacular Hitchcock achievement."[86] Hitchcock was pleased with the tension and drama the score added to the film,[87] later remarking "33% of the effect of Psycho was due to the music."[88] The singular contribution of Herrmann's score may be inferred from the film's credit roll, where the composer's name precedes only the director's own, a distinction unprecedented in the annals of commercial cinematic music. Herrmann used the lowered music budget to his advantage by writing for a string orchestra rather than a full symphonic ensemble,[85] disregarding Hitchcock's request for a jazz score.[89] He thought of the single tone color of the all-string soundtrack as a way of reflecting the black-and-white cinematography of the film.[90] Hollywood composer Fred Steiner, in an analysis of the score to Psycho, points out that string instruments gave Herrmann access to a wider range in tone, dynamics and instrumental special effects than any other single instrumental group would have.[91]The main title music, a tense, hurtling piece, sets the tone of impending violence, and returns three times on the soundtrack.[92][93] Though nothing shocking occurs during the first 1520 minutes of the film, the title music remains in the audience's mind, lending tension to these early scenes.[92] Herrmann also maintains tension through the slower moments in the film through the use of ostinato.[88]There were rumors that Herrmann had used electronic means, including amplified bird screeches to achieve the shocking effect of the music in the shower scene. The effect was achieved, however, only with violins in a "screeching, stabbing sound-motion of extraordinary viciousness."[94] The only electronic amplification employed was in the placing of the microphones close to the instruments, to get a harsher sound.[94] Besides the emotional impact, the shower scene cue ties the soundtrack to birds.[94] The association of the shower scene music with birds also telegraphs to the audience that it is Norman, the stuffed-bird collector, who is the murderer rather than his mother.[94]Herrmann biographer Steven C. Smith writes that the music for the shower scene is "probably the most famous (and most imitated) cue in film music,"[90] but Hitchock was originally opposed to having music in this scene.[94] When Herrmann played the shower scene cue for Hitchcock, the director approved its use in the film. Herrmann reminded Hitchcock of his instructions not to score this scene, to which Hitchcock replied, "Improper suggestion, my boy, improper suggestion."[95] This was one of two important disagreements Hitchcock had with Herrmann, in which Herrmann ignored Hitchcock's instructions. The second one, over the score for Torn Curtain (1966), resulted in the end of their professional collaboration.[96] A survey conducted by PRS for Music, in 2009, showed that the British public consider the score from 'the shower scene' to be the scariest theme from any film.[97]To honor the 50th anniversary of Psycho, in July 2010, the San Francisco Symphony[98] obtained a print of the film with the soundtrack removed, and projected it on a large screen in Davies Symphony Hall while the orchestra performed the score live. This was previously mounted by the Seattle Symphony in October, 2009 as well, performing at the Benroya Hall for two consecutive evenings.Several CDs of the film soundtrack have been released, including:Psycho is a prime example of the type of film that appeared in the United States during the 1960s after the erosion of the Production Code. It was unprecedented in its depiction of sexuality and violence, right from the opening scene in which Sam and Marion are shown as lovers sharing the same bed, with Marion in a bra.[100] In the Production Code standards of that time, unmarried couples shown in the same bed would be taboo.[101]According to the book Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho, the censors in charge of enforcing the Production Code wrangled with Hitchcock because some of them insisted they could see one of Leigh's breasts. Hitchcock held onto the print for several days, left it untouched, and resubmitted it for approval. Each of the censors reversed their positions: those who had previously seen the breast now did not, and those who had not, now did. They passed the film after the director removed one shot that showed the buttocks of Leigh's stand-in.[102] The board was also upset by the racy opening, so Hitchcock said that if they let him keep the shower scene he would re-shoot the opening with them on the set. Since they did not show up for the re-shoot, the opening stayed.[102]Another cause of concern for the censors[103][104][105] was that Marion was shown flushing a toilet, with its contents (torn-up note paper) fully visible. Up until that time in mainstream film and television in the U.S., a toilet flushing was never heard, let alone seen. A possible exception is the Turner Classic Movies print of the 1959 Walt Disney film The Shaggy Dog, in which a toilet is heard flushing off-camera. However, because of the possibility of audio dubbing in restorations and reissues of the film over the years, today it is unclear whether or not the sound of the toilet flushing was in the original 1959 release.Also, according to the "Making of" featurette on the Collector's Edition DVD, some censors objected to the use of the word "transvestite" in the film's closing scenes.[17] This objection was withdrawn after writer Joseph Stefano took out a dictionary and proved to them that the word carried no hidden sexual context, but merely referred to "a man who likes to wear womens clothing".[105]Internationally, Hitchcock was forced to make minor changes to the film, mostly to the shower scene. In Britain and New Zealand the shot of Norman washing blood from his hands was objected to and in Singapore, though the shower scene was left untouched, the murder of Arbogast and a shot of Mother's corpse were removed.[106]Hitchcock did most of the promotion on his own, forbidding Leigh and Perkins to make the usual television, radio, and print interviews for fear of their revealing the plot.[107] Even critics were not given private screenings but rather had to see the film with the general public, which, despite possibly affecting their reviews,[106] certainly preserved the plot.The film's original trailer features a jovial Hitchcock taking the viewer on a tour of the set, and almost giving away plot details before stopping himself. It is "tracked" with Bernard Herrmann's Psycho theme, but also jovial music from Hitchcock's comedy The Trouble with Harry; most of Hitchcock's dialogue is post-synchronized. The trailer was made after completion of the film, and since Janet Leigh was no longer available for filming, Hitchcock had Vera Miles don a blonde wig and scream loudly as he pulled the shower curtain back in the bathroom sequence of the preview. Since the title, "Psycho," instantly covers most of the screen, the switch went unnoticed by audiences for years. However a freeze-frame analysis clearly reveals that it is Vera Miles and not Janet Leigh in the shower during the trailer.[31]The most controversial move was Hitchcock's "no late admission" policy for the film, which was unusual for the time. It was not entirely original as Clouzot had done the same in France for Les Diaboliques.[108] Hitchcock thought that if people entered the theater late and never saw the star actress Janet Leigh, they would feel cheated.[31] At first theater owners opposed the idea, claiming that they would lose business. However, after the first day, the owners enjoyed long lines of people waiting to see the film.[31]The film was so successful that it was reissued to theaters in 1965. A year later, CBS purchased the television rights for $450,000. CBS planned to televise the film on September 23, 1966, but three days earlier, Valerie Percy, daughter of Illinois senate candidate Charles H. Percy, was murdered. As her parents slept mere feet away, she was stabbed a dozen times with a double-edged knife. In light of the murder, CBS agreed to postpone the screening, but as a result of the Apollo pad fire of January 27, 1967, the network washed its hands of Psycho,[109] and shortly afterward Paramount included the film in its first syndicated package of post-1950 movies, "Portfolio I." WABC-TV in New York City was the first station in the country to air Psycho (with some scenes significantly edited), on its late-night movie series, The Best of Broadway, on June 24, 1967.[110] Following another successful theatrical reissue in 1969, the film finally made its way to general television airing in one of Universal's syndicated programming packages for local stations in 1970. Psycho was aired for twenty years in this format, then leased to cable for two years before returning to syndication as part of the "List of a Lifetime" package.[109]In Psycho, Hitchcock subverts the romantic elements that are seen in most of his work. The film is instead ironic as it prevents "clarity and fulfillment" of romance. The past is central to the film; the main characters "struggle to understand and resolve destructive personal histories" and ultimately fail.[111] Lesley Brill writes, "The inexorable forces of past sins and mistakes crush hopes for regeneration and present happiness." The crushed hope is highlighted by the death of the protagonist, Marion Crane, halfway through the film.[112] Marion is like Persephone of Greek mythology, who is abducted temporarily from the world of the living. The myth does not sustain with Marion, who dies hopelessly in her room at the Bates Motel. The room is wallpapered with floral print like Persephone's flowers, but they are only "reflected in mirrors, as images of imagestwice removed from reality". In the scene of Marion's death, Brill describes the transition from the bathroom drain to Marion's lifeless eye, "Like the eye of the amorphous sea creature at the end of Fellini's La Dolce Vita, it marks the birth of death, an emblem of final hopelessness and corruption." Unlike heroines in Hitchcock's other films, she does not reestablish her innocence or discover love.[113]Marion is deprived of "the humble treasures of love, marriage, home and family", which Hitchcock considers elements of human happiness. There exists among Psycho's secondary characters a lack of "familial warmth and stability", which demonstrates the unlikelihood of domestic fantasies. The film contains ironic jokes about domesticity, such as when Sam writes a letter to Marion, agreeing to marry her, only after the audience sees her buried in the swamp. Sam and Marion's sister Lila, in investigating Marion's disappearance, develop an "increasingly connubial" relationship, a development that Marion is denied.[114] Norman also suffers a similarly perverse definition of domesticity. He has "an infantile and divided personality" and lives in a mansion whose past occupies the present. Norman displays stuffed birds that are "frozen in time" and keeps childhood toys and stuffed animals in his room. He is hostile toward suggestions to move from the past, such as with Marion's suggestion to put his mother "someplace" and as a result kills Marion to preserve his past. Brill explains, "'Someplace' for Norman is where his delusions of love, home, and family are declared invalid and exposed."[115]Light and darkness feature prominently in Psycho. The first shot after the intertitle is the sunny landscape of Phoenix before the camera enters a dark hotel room where Sam and Marion appear as bright figures. Marion is almost immediately cast in darkness; she is preceded by her shadow as she reenters the office to steal money and as she enters her bedroom. When she flees Phoenix, darkness descends on her drive. The following sunny morning is punctured by a watchful police officer with black sunglasses, and she finally arrives at the Bates Motel in near darkness.[116] Bright lights are also "the ironic equivalent of darkness" in the film, blinding instead of illuminating. Examples of brightness include the opening window shades in Sam's and Marion's hotel room, vehicle headlights at night, the neon sign at the Bates Motel, "the glaring white" of the bathroom tiles where Marion dies, and the fruit cellar's exposed light bulb shining on the corpse of Norman's mother. Such bright lights typically characterize danger and violence in Hitchcock's films.[117]The film often features shadows, mirrors, windows, and, less so, water. The shadows are present from the very first scene where the blinds make bars on Marion and Sam as they peer out the window. The stuffed birds' shadows loom over Marion as she eats, and Norman's mother is seen in only shadows until the very end. More subtly, back-lighting turns the rakes in the hardware store into talons above Lila's head.[118]Mirrors reflect Marion as she packs, her eyes as she checks the rear-view mirror, her face in the policeman's sunglasses, and her hands as she counts out the money in the car dealership's bathroom. A motel window serves as a mirror by reflecting Marion and Norman together. Hitchcock shoots through Marion's windshield and the telephone booth, when Arbogast phones Sam and Lila. The heavy downpour can be seen as foreshadowing of the shower, and it letting up can be seen as a symbol of Marion making up her mind to return to Phoenix.[118]There are a number of references to birds. Marion's last name is Crane and she is from Phoenix. Norman comments that Marion eats like a bird. The motel room has pictures of birds on the wall. Brigitte Peucker also suggests that Norman's hobby of stuffing birds literalizes the British slang expression for sex, "stuffing birds", bird being a British slang for a desirable woman.[119] Robert Allan suggests that Norman's mother is his original "stuffed bird", both in the sense of having preserved her body and the incestuous nature of Norman's emotional bond with her.[120]Psycho has been called "the first psychoanalytical thriller."[121] The sex and violence in the film were unlike anything previously seen in a mainstream film. "[T]he shower scene is both feared and desired," wrote French film critic Serge Kaganski. "Hitchcock may be scaring his female viewers out of their wits, but he is turning his male viewers into potential rapists, since Janet Leigh has been turning men on ever since she appeared in her brassiere in the first scene."[121]In his documentary The Pervert's Guide to Cinema, Slavoj iek remarks that Norman Bates' mansion has three floors, paralleling the three levels of the human mind that are postulated by Freudian psychoanalysis: the top floor would be the superego, where Bates' mother lives; the ground floor is then Bates' ego, where he functions as an apparently normal human being; and finally, the basement would be Bates' id. iek interprets Bates' moving his mother's corpse from top floor to basement as a symbol for the deep connection that psychoanalysis posits between superego and id.[122]Initial reviews of the film were thoroughly mixed.[123] Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote, "There is not an abundance of subtlety or the lately familiar Hitchcock bent toward significant and colorful scenery in this obviously low-budget job." Crowther called the "slow buildups to sudden shocks" reliably melodramatic but contested Hitchcock's psychological points, reminiscent of Krafft-Ebing's studies, as less effective. While the film did not conclude satisfactorily for the critic, he commended the cast's performances as "fair".[124] British critic C. A. Lejeune was so offended that she not only walked out before the end but permanently resigned her post as film critic for The Observer.[125] Other negative reviews stated, "a blot on an honorable career", "plainly a gimmick movie", and "merely one of those television shows padded out to two hours."[123][126] Positive reviews stated, "Anthony Perkins' performance is the best of his career... Janet Leigh has never been better", "played out beautifully", and "first American movie since Touch of Evil to stand in the same creative rank as the great European films."[123][127] A good example of the mix is the New York Herald Tribune's review, which stated, "...rather difficult to be amused at the forms insanity may take... keeps your attention like a snake-charmer."[123]The public loved the film, with lines stretching outside of theatres as people had to wait for the next showing. It broke box-office records in Japan, China[citation needed] and the rest of Asia, France, Britain, South America, the United States and Canada, and was a moderate success in Australia for a brief period.[123] It is one of the largest-grossing black-and-white films and helped make Hitchcock a multimillionaire and the third-largest shareholder in Universal.[128] Psycho was, by a large margin, the top moneymaking film of Hitchcock's career, earning $11,200,000 ($82.5 million in 2010, adjusted for inflation).[129]In the United Kingdom, the film shattered attendance records at the London Plaza Cinema, but nearly all British critics panned it, questioning Hitchcock's taste and judgment. Reasons cited for this were the critics' late screenings, forcing them to rush their reviews, their dislike of the gimmicky promotion, and Hitchcock's expatriate status.[130] Perhaps thanks to the public's response and Hitchcock's efforts at promoting it, the critics did a re-review, and the film was praised. TIME switched its opinion from "Hitchcock bears down too heavily in this one" to "superlative" and "masterly", and Bosley Crowther put it on his Top Ten list of 1960.[130]Psycho was initially criticized for making other filmmakers more willing to show gore; three years later, Blood Feast, considered to be the first "splatter film", was released.[131] Psycho's success financially and critically had others trying to ride its coattails. Inspired by Psycho, Hammer Film Productions launched a series of mystery thrillers including The Nanny[132] (1965) starring Bette Davis and William Castle's Homicidal (1961) was followed by a slew of more than 13 other splatter films.[131]In 1992, the film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.Leigh asserted, "no other murder mystery in the history of the movies has inspired such merchandising."[133] Any number of items emblazoned with Bates Motel, stills, lobby cards, and highly valuable posters are available for purchase. In 1992, it was adapted scene-for-scene into three comic books by the Innovative Corporation.[133]Psycho has appeared on a number of lists by websites, television channels, and magazines. The shower scene was featured as number four on the list of Bravo Network's 100 Scariest Movie Moments,[134] whilst the finale was ranked number four on Premiere's similar list.[135] Entertainment Weekly's book titled The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time ranked the film as #11.[1]Three sequels were produced: Psycho II (1983), Psycho III (1986), and Psycho IV: The Beginning (1990), the last being a part-prequel television movie written by the original screenplay author, Joseph Stefano. Anthony Perkins returned to his role of Norman Bates in all three sequels, and also directed the third film. The voice of Norman Bates' mother was maintained by noted radio actress Virginia Gregg with the exception of Psycho IV, where the role was played by Olivia Hussey. Vera Miles also reprised her role of Lila Crane in Psycho II.[137] The sequels were well received but considered inferior to the original.[138][139]Bates Motel was a failed television pilot spin-off which later aired as a television movie (before the release of Psycho IV). Anthony Perkins declined to appear in the pilot, so Norman's cameo appearance was played by Kurt Paul, who was Perkins' stunt double on Psycho II and III.[140] In 1998, Gus Van Sant directed a remake of Psycho. The film is in color and features a different cast, but aside from this it is a virtually shot-for-shot remake copying Hitchcock's camera movements and editing.[141] A Conversation with Norman (2005), directed by Jonathan M. Parisen, was a film inspired by Psycho.As of 2010, a drama film is in development based on the book by Stephen Rebello, Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho. The film was originally titled Alfred Hitchcock Presents and set to be directed by Ryan Murphy and star Anthony Hopkins as Hitchcock.[142] It was later announced, however, that the film would be directed by Sacha Gervasi and retitled Hitchcock, with filming beginning on April 13, 2012.[143] Filming was completed in early June 2012 with expected release in November 2012. The film is centered around the relationship between Alfred Hitchcock and wife Alma Reville during the filming of Psycho in 1959. The film is being directed by Sacha Gervasi and written by John McLaughlin and Stephen Rebello. The film will star Anthony Hopkins as Alfred Hitchcock, Helen Mirren as Alma Reville, Scarlett Johansson as Janet Leigh, Jessica Biel as Vera Miles and James D'Arcy as Anthony Perkins.On October 19, 2010, an independent documentary called The Psycho Legacy was released on DVD. The documentary discussed the legacy and impact Psycho has had on not only cinema but the world. The documentary also included production stories on Psycho II, Psycho III and Psycho IV: The Beginning. It received mostly positive reviews from critics and fans.On January 13, 2012, A&E announced that a television series called Bates Motel was in development at the network. The TV series has nothing to do with the earlier Bates Motel failed TV pilot released in 1987. The series will take place before the events of the original film and will chronicle Norman Bates' early childhood with his mother and how she drove him to become a killer, similar to the flashback sequences in Psycho IV: The Beginning.[144] In July 2012, A&E announced that the network had picked up the show for a 10 episode first season, skipping the initial pilot stage.Psycho has become one of the most recognizable films in cinema history, and is arguably Hitchcock's best known film.[145][146] In his novel, Bloch used an uncommon plot structure: he repeatedly introduced sympathetic protagonists, then killed them off. This played on his reader's expectations of traditional plots, leaving them uncertain and anxious. Hitchcock recognized the effect this approach could have on audiences, and utilized it in his adaptation, killing off Leigh's character at the end of the first act. This daring plot device, coupled with the fact that the character was played by the biggest box-office name in the film, was a shocking turn of events in 1960.[100]The most original and influential moment in the film is the "shower scene", which became iconic in pop culture because it is often regarded as one of the most terrifying scenes ever filmed. Part of its effectiveness was due to the use of startling editing techniques borrowed from the Soviet montage filmmakers,[147][148] and to the iconic screeching violins in Bernard Herrmann's musical score. The iconic shower scene is frequently spoofed, given homage to and referenced in popular culture, complete with the violin screeching sound effects (see Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, among many others).[149]Psycho is now widely considered to be the first film in the slasher film genre,[150][151] and has been referenced in films numerous times; examples include the 1974 musical horror film Phantom of the Paradise, 1978 horror film Halloween (which starred Jamie Lee Curtis, Janet Leigh's daughter),[152] the 1977 Mel Brooks tribute to many of Hitchcock's thrillers, High Anxiety, the 1980 Fade to Black, the 1980 Dressed to Kill and Wes Craven's 1996 horror satire Scream.[153] Bernard Herrmann's opening theme has been sampled by rapper Busta Rhymes on his song "Gimme Some More" (1998).[154] Manuel Muoz's 2011 novel What You See in the Dark includes a sub-plot that fictionalises elements of the filming of Psycho, referring to Hitchcock and Leigh only as "The Director" and "The Actress".[155] In the comic book stories of Jonni Future, the house inherited by title character is patterned after the Bates Hotel.[156] The ending sequence is also parodied by South Park in "City Sushi".Psycho has been rated and re-rated several times over the years by the MPAA. Upon its initial release, the film received a certificate stating that it was "Approved" (certificate #19564) under the simple pass/fail system of the Production Code in use at that time. Later, when the MPAA switched to a voluntary letter ratings system in 1968, Psycho was one of a number of high-profile motion pictures to be retro-rated with an "M" (Mature Audiences).[157] This remained the only rating the film would receive for 16 years, and according to the guidelines of the time "M" was the equivalent of a "PG" rating.[158] Then, in 1984, during the uproar of increased parental concern regarding violence in "PG" films,[158] Psycho was retro-rated again to its current rating of "R." This rating took effect, however, before the institution of the "PG-13" rating by the MPAA that same year, and there are those who have speculated that if the rating had existed at the time, or if Psycho were rated in America today, it would receive a "PG-13."The film has been released several times on videotape, LaserDisc, and DVD. MCA DiscoVision Incorporated (parent company, MCA Inc) first released Psycho on the LaserDisc format in "standard play" (5 sides) in 1979, and "extended play" (2 sides) in October 1981. MCA/Universal Home Video released a new LaserDisc version of Psycho in August 1988 (Catalog #: 11003). In May 1998, Universal Studios Home Video released a deluxe edition of Psycho as part of their Signature Collection. This THX certified Widescreen (1.85:1) LaserDisc Deluxe Edition (Catalog #: 43105) is spread across 4 extended play sides and 1 standard play side, and includes a new documentary and isolated Bernard Hermann score. A DVD edition was released in at the same time as the LaserDisc.[159]Laurent Bouzereau produced a documentary looking at the film's production and reception for the initial DVD release. Universal released a 50th Anniversary edition on Blu-ray in the United Kingdom on 9 August 2010,[160] with Australia following with the same edition (featuring a different cover) being made available on 1 September 2010.[161] A Blu-ray in US was released on October 19, 2010 to mark the film's 50th anniversary, featuring yet another different cover.[162]The following publications are among those devoted to the production of Psycho:June 16, 1960(1960-06-16)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Novel adaptation
3.3 Pre-production
3.4 Filming
3.5 Shower scene

3.1 Development3.2 Novel adaptation3.3 Pre-production3.4 Filming3.5 Shower scene4 Soundtrack

4.1 Score
4.2 Recordings

4.1 Score4.2 Recordings5 Controversy6 Promotion7 Interpretations

7.1 Subversion of romance through irony
7.2 Motifs
7.3 Psychoanalytic interpretation

7.1 Subversion of romance through irony7.2 Motifs7.3 Psychoanalytic interpretation8 Reception9 Recognition10 Sequels and remakes11 Cultural impact12 Ratings13 Home media14 See also15 References16 External links3.1 Development3.2 Novel adaptation3.3 Pre-production3.4 Filming3.5 Shower scene4.1 Score4.2 Recordings7.1 Subversion of romance through irony7.2 Motifs7.3 Psychoanalytic interpretationAnthony Perkins as Norman BatesVera Miles as Lila CraneJanet Leigh as Marion CraneJohn Gavin as Sam LoomisMartin Balsam as Det. Milton ArbogastJohn McIntire as Sheriff Al ChambersSimon Oakland as Dr. Fred RichmondFrank Albertson as Tom CassidyPat Hitchcock as CarolineVaughn Taylor as George LoweryLurene Tuttle as Mrs. ChambersJohn Anderson as California CharlieMort Mills as Highway patrolmanVirginia Gregg, Jeanette Nolan, and Paul Jasmin (all uncredited) as the voice of Norma BatesTed Knight (uncredited) as a police officerThe 1970s soundtrack recording with Bernard Herrmann conducting the National Philharmonic Orchestra [Unicorn CD, 1993].[99]The 1997 Varse Sarabande CD features all the music scored in the film, but the pieces were re-recorded in 1975 by the composer.[99]The 1998 Soundstage Records SCD 585 CD claims to feature the tracks from the original master tapes. However, it has been asserted that the release is a bootleg recording.[99]AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - #18AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills - #1AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Norman Bates - #2 Villain

Norman Bates - #2 VillainAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"A boy's best friend is his mother." - #56
"We all go a little mad sometimes." - Nominated[136]

"A boy's best friend is his mother." - #56"We all go a little mad sometimes." - Nominated[136]AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - #4AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #14Norman Bates - #2 Villain"A boy's best friend is his mother." - #56"We all go a little mad sometimes." - Nominated[136]Hitchcock, a 2012 biopic film about Hitchcock and the making of Psycho with Anthony Hopkins as Alfred Hitchcock and James D'Arcy as Anthony Perkins.Allen, Richard (2007). Hitchcock's romantic irony. Columbia University Press. ISBN0-231-13575-0.Brill, Lesley (1988). "'I Look Up, I Look Down' (Vertigo and Psycho)". The Hitchcock Romance: Love and Irony in Hitchcock's Films. Princeton University Press. ISBN0-691-00822-1.Caminer, Sylvia; Gallagher, John Andrew (January/February 1996). "An Interview with Joseph Stefano.". Films in Review XLVII (1/2).Dancyger, Ken (2002). The Technique of Film and Video Editing: History, Theory, and Practice. New York: Focal Press. ISBN0-240-80420-1.Hardy, Phil (1986). Encyclopedia of Horror Movies. London: Octopus Books. ISBN0-7064-2771-8.Kaganski, Serge (1997). Alfred Hitchcock. Paris: Hazan.Krohn (2003). Hitchcock at Work. Phaidon Press Ltd.Nickens, Christopher; Leigh, Janet (1996). Psycho: Behind the Scenes of the Classic Thriller. Harmony. ISBN0-517-70112-X.Palmer, Christopher (1990). The Composer in Hollywood. London: Marion Boyars. ISBN[[Special:BookSources/0-17-452950-8|0-17-452950-8]].Rebello, Stephen (1990). Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho. Marion Boyars. ISBN0-7145-3003-4.Reavill, Gil (2007). Aftermath, Inc.: Cleaning Up After CSI Goes Home. Gotham. ISBN978-1-59240-296-0.Schickel, Richard; Frank Capra (2001). The Men Who Made the Movies. I.R. Dee. ISBN1-56663-374-5, 9781566633741.Smith, Joseph W., III. (2009). The Psycho File: A Comprehensive Guide to Hitchcock's Classic Shocker. Berkeley: McFarland.Smith, Steven C. (1991). A Heart at Fire's Center; The Life and Music of Bernard Herrmann. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN0-520-22939-8.Steinberg, Cobbett (1980). Film Facts. New York: Facts on File, Inc.. ISBN0-87196-313-2.Winecoff, Charles (1996). Split Image: The Life of Anthony Perkins. Diane Pub Co.. ISBN0-7881-9870-X.Truffaut, Franois; Helen Scott (1967). Hitchcock (Revised ed.). New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN0-671-60429-5.Wagstaff, Sheena, ed. (2004). Edward Hopper. London: Tate Publishing. ISBN1-85437-533-4.Wood, Robin (1989). Hitchcock's Films Revisited. London: Faber and Faber. ISBN0-571-16226-6.Anobile, Richard J.; editor. Alfred Hitchcock's Psycho (The Film Classics Library). Avon Books, 1974. This volume, published before the proliferation of home video, is entirely composed of photo reproductions of film frames along with dialogue captions, creating a fumetti of the entire motion picture.Durgnat, Raymond E. A Long Hard Look at Psycho (BFI Film Classics). British Film Institute, 2002.Kolker, Robert; editor. Alfred Hitchcock's Psycho: A Casebook. Oxford University Press, 2005.Leigh, Janet with Christopher Nickens. Psycho: Behind the Scenes of the Classic Thriller. Harmony Press, 1995.Naremore, James. Filmguide to Psycho. Indiana University Press, 1973.Rebello, Stephen. Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho. Dembner Books, 1990. A definitive "making of" account tracing every stage of the production of the film as well as its aftermath.Rebello, Stephen. "Psycho: The Making of Alfred Hitchcock's Masterpiece". "Cinefantastique", April 1986 (Volume 16, Number 4/5). Comprehensive 22-page article.Skerry, Philip J. The Shower Scene in Hitchcock's Psycho: Creating Cinematic Suspense and Terror. Edwin Mellen Press, 2005.Smith, Joseph W., III. The Psycho File: A Comprehensive Guide to Hitchcock's Classic Shocker. McFarland, 2009.Thomson, David, The Moment of Psycho (2009) ISBN 978-0-465-00339-6Psycho at the Internet Movie DatabasePsycho at Rotten TomatoesBright Lights Film Journal article on PsychoFilmsite: Psycho In-depth analysis of the filmPsycho and Bernard Herrmann film score"Psycho' at 50: What We've Learned from Alfred Hitchcock's Horror Classic" by Gary Susman  Moviefone  June 15, 2010The General is a 1926[1] American silent comedy film released by United Artists inspired by the Great Locomotive Chase, which happened in 1862. Buster Keaton starred in the film and co-directed it with Clyde Bruckman. It was adapted by Al Boasberg, Bruckman, Keaton, Charles Henry Smith (uncredited) and Paul Girard Smith (uncredited) from the memoir The Great Locomotive Chase by William Pittenger.The film, an adventure-epic classic made toward the end of the silent era, received both poor reviews by critics (it was considered tedious and disappointing) and weak box-office results (about a half million dollars domestically, and approximately one million worldwide) at its original release, but is now considered by critics as one of the greatest films ever made. However, because of its huge budget ($750,000 supplied by Metro chief Joseph Schenck) and poor box office, Keaton lost his independence as a film-maker and was forced into a restrictive deal with MGM. In 1956, the film entered the public domain (in the USA) due to the claimant's failure to renew its copyright registration in the 28th year after publication.[2]Western & Atlantic Railroad train engineer Johnnie Gray (Keaton) is in Marietta, Georgia to see one of the two loves of his life, his fiancee Annabelle Lee (Marion Mack)the other being his locomotive, The Generalwhen the American Civil War breaks out. He hurries to be first in line to sign up with the Confederate Army, but is rejected because he is too valuable in his present job. On leaving, he runs into Annabelle's father and brother, who beckon to him to join them in line, but he sadly walks away, giving them the impression that he does not want to enlist. Annabelle coldly informs Johnnie that she will not speak to him again until he is in uniform.A year passes, and Annabelle receives word that her father has been wounded. She travels north on the General to see him but still wants nothing to do with Johnnie. When the train makes a stop, the passengers detrain for a quick meal. As planned, Union spies led by Captain Anderson (Glen Cavender) use the opportunity to steal the train. Annabelle becomes an inadvertent prisoner. Johnnie gives chase, first on foot, then by handcar and boneshaker bicycle, before reaching a station in Chattanooga. He alerts the army detachment there, which boards another train to give chase, with Johnnie manning the locomotive, the Texas. However, the flatcars are not hooked up to the engine, and the troops are left behind. By the time Johnnie realizes he is alone, it is too late to turn back.The Union agents try a variety of methods to shake their dogged pursuer (convinced he is accompanied by Confederate soldiers), including disconnecting their trailing car and dropping railroad ties on the tracks. As the unusual duel continues northward, the Confederate Army of Tennessee is ordered to retreat and the Northern army advances in its wake. Johnnie finally notices he is surrounded by Union soldiers and the hijackers see that Johnnie is by himself. Johnnie stops his locomotive and runs into the forest to hide.At nightfall, Johnnie stumbles upon the Northern army encampment. Hungry, he climbs through a window to steal some food but has to hide underneath the table when enemy officers enter. He overhears them discussing their plan to launch a surprise attack; Johnnie learns that securing the Rock River Bridge is essential for their supply trains. He then sees Annabelle brought in; she is taken to a room under guard while they decide what to do with her. After the meeting ends, Johnnie manages to knock out both of the guards and free Annabelle. They escape into the woods.The next day, Johnnie and Annabelle creep out of the woods and find themselves near a railway station, where Union soldiers, guns, trains and equipment are being organized for the attack. Seeing the General in the midst of it all, Johnnie devises a plan to warn the South. After sneaking Annabelle, hidden inside a sack, onto a boxcar behind the General, Johnnie steals his engine back. Two other trains, including the Texas, set out after the pair, while the Northern attack is immediately set in motion. In a reversal of the first chase, Johnnie has to fend off his pursuers. Finally, he starts a fire behind the General in the center of the Rock River Bridge.Reaching friendly lines, Johnnie informs the local army commander of the impending attack. Confederate forces rush to defend the bridge. Meanwhile, Annabelle is reunited with her convalescing father. The Texas is driven onto the burning bridge, but it collapses, in what would later come to be recognized as the most expensive stunt of the silent era.[3] Union soldiers try to ford the river, but Confederate artillery and infantrymen open fire on them, eventually driving them back in disarray.As a reward for his bravery, Johnnie is enlisted in the army as a lieutenant. In the final scene, Johnnie tries to kiss his girlfriend but is obliged to return the salutes of passing soldiers. Johnnie finally uses one hand to embrace his girlfriend while using his other to blindly salute the men as they walk by.Keaton performed many dangerous physical stunts on and around the moving train, including jumping from the engine to a tender to a boxcar, sitting on the cow-catcher of the slow moving train while holding a railroad tie, and running along the roof. One of the most dangerous stunts occurred when Buster sat on one of the coupling rods, which connect the drivers of the locomotive. In the film, the train starts gently and gradually picks up speed as it enters a shed.The climax of the film includes a spectacular moment where a bridge (sabotaged by Johnnie) collapses as a railroad train crosses it. Keaton filmed the collapse in the conifer forest around the town of Cottage Grove, Oregon, using 500 extras from the Oregon National Guard. They all dressed up in Union uniforms and were filmed going left-to-right before changing into Confederate uniforms and being filmed going right-to-left.The production company left the wreckage in the river bed after the scene was filmed. The wrecked locomotive became a minor tourist attraction for nearly twenty years. The metal of the train was salvaged for scrap during World War II.The General on its initial release fared poorly in both box office and critical reaction. Variety reported of a theater in which it played, "after four weeks of record business with 'Flesh and the Devil', looks as though it were virtually going to starve to death this week." It goes on to say that The General is "far from funny" and that "it is a flop."[4] New York Times reviewer Mordaunt Hall stated, "The production itself is singularly well mounted, but the fun is not exactly plentiful", and "This is by no means so good as Mr. Keaton's previous efforts."[5] The Los Angeles Times reported that the picture is "neither straight comedy nor is it altogether thrilling drama" and goes on to state that the picture "drags terribly with a long and tiresome chase of one engine by another."[6] It was one of Keaton's worst pictures at the box office.Keaton considered it to be the best of all his movies. Audiences and critics would later agree with him, and it is now considered a major classic of the silent era.In 1989, The General was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". It made it into the registry in the first year it was enacted, along with such films as The Best Years of Our Lives, Casablanca, Citizen Kane, Gone with the Wind, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, and Sunset Blvd.In a 2002 poll of critics and filmmakers on the best films ever made, critic Roger Ebert listed it on his top 10.[7] It is also on his list of Great Movies.[8] It was ranked number 1 in a list of the 100 greatest films of the silent era by the website silentera.com.[9]U.S. film distributor Kino International released the film on Blu-ray Disc in November 2009.[10] This is the first American release of a silent feature film for the High Definition video medium.[citation needed] The Blu-ray edition replicates the same extra features of Kino's 2008 "The Ultimate 2-Disc Edition" on DVD, including the choice of three different orchestral scores as soundtrack.American Film Institute recognitionIn 1953, a new version of the film was created by Raymond Rohauer, a film distributor and collector. The movie was re-edited with an introduction and music. This version is still under copyright as Rohauer filed a copyright registration in 1953 and renewed the copyright in 1983.[2]December 31, 1926(1926-12-31)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception5 1953 Version6 See also7 References

7.1 Bibliography

7.1 Bibliography8 External links7.1 BibliographyBuster Keaton  Johnnie GrayMarion Mack Annabelle LeeGlen Cavender  Captain AndersonJim Farley  General ThatcherFrederick Vroom  A Confederate GeneralCharles Henry Smith  Annabelle's Father (as Charles Smith)Frank Barnes  Annabelle's BrotherJoe Keaton  Union GeneralMike Donlin  Union GeneralTom Nawn  Union GeneralAFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs #18AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #18Buster Keaton filmographyList of United States comedy filmsList of films in the public domainOrson Welles interview, from the Kino 10 Nov 2009 Blu-ray edition of The GeneralDaring and Suffering: A History of the Great Railway Adventure by Lieutenant William PittengerHuntley, John (1969). Railways In The Cinema. Ian Allan. pp.3342. SBN 7110 0115 4.The General at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe General is available for free download at the Internet Archive [more]Choice Clips (Public Domain)The Raid Lives OnChinatown is a 1974 American neo-noir film, directed by Roman Polanski from a screenplay by Robert Towne and starring Jack Nicholson, Faye Dunaway, and John Huston. The film features many elements of the film noir genre, particularly a multi-layered story that is part mystery and part psychological drama. It was released by Paramount Pictures. The story, set in Los Angeles in 1937, was inspired by the California Water Wars, the historical disputes over land and water rights that had raged in southern California during the 1910s and 1920s, in which William Mulholland acted on behalf of Los Angeles interests to secure water rights in the Owens Valley. Chinatown was the last film Roman Polanski made in the United States before fleeing to Europe.Chinatown has been frequently cited as one of the greatest films ever made.[3][4][5] It holds second place on the American Film Institute list of Best Mystery Films of all time. Chinatown was nominated for eleven Academy Awards, ultimately winning only Best Original Screenplay for Robert Towne. It also won Golden Globe Awards for Best Film, Best Director, Best Actor, and Best Screenplay. In 1991, Chinatown was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."A sequel, The Two Jakes, was released in 1990, again starring Nicholson, who also directed, with Robert Towne returning to write the screenplay. The film, however, failed to generate the acclaim of its predecessor.Evelyn Mulwray (Ladd) hires private investigator J.J. "Jake" Gittes (Nicholson) to perform matrimonial surveillance on her husband Hollis I. Mulwray (Zwerling), the chief engineer for the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power. Gittes tails him, hears him publicly oppose the creation of a new reservoir, and shoots photographs of him with a young woman (Palmer) that hit the front page of the following day's paper. However, upon his return to his office he is confronted by a beautiful woman who, after establishing that the two of them have never met, irately informs him that she is the real Evelyn Mulwray (Dunaway) and he can expect a lawsuit.Realizing he was set up, Gittes figures whoever did it wants to get Mulwray, but, before he can question the husband, Lt. Lou Escobar (Lopez) fishes his drowned body from a fresh water reservoir. Suspicious of murder, Gittes investigates, and notices that, although huge quantities of water are released from the reservoir every night, the land is almost completely dry. He is confronted by Water Department Security Chief Claude Mulvihill (Jenson) with a henchman (Polanski) who slashes Gittes's nose. Back at his office, Gittes receives a call from Ida Sessions, an actress whom he recognizes as the bogus Mrs. Mulwray. She is afraid to identify her employer, but provides a clue: the name of one of "those people" is in that day's obituaries.Gittes learns that Mrs. Mulwray's husband was once the business partner of her father, Noah Cross (Huston), so he meets him for lunch at his palatial estate. Cross offers to double Gittes's fee to search for Mulwray's missing girlfriend, plus a bonus if he succeeds. Gittes visits the hall of records, where he discovers that many large orange groves have recently changed ownership in the northwest San Fernando Valley. He goes there but is caught and beaten by angry landowners; they think he's one of the water department agents who have been demolishing their water tanks and poisoning their wells to force them out.Gittes's review of the obituaries uncovers a former resident of the Mar Vista Inn, a retirement home, who is one of the new landowners in the Valley. He infers that Mulwray was murdered when he learned that the new reservoir would be used to irrigate the newly-purchased properties. Evelyn and Gittes bluff their way into Mar Vista and confirm that the real estate deals are done in the name of its residents without their knowledge. After fleeing from Mulvihill and his thugs, they hide at Evelyn's house, where they nurse each other's wounds and make love.In the morning, Evelyn has to leave suddenly, but she warns him that her father is dangerous and crazy. Gittes manages to follow her car to a house where he observes her with Mulwray's girlfriend. He confronts Evelyn, who finally confesses that the woman is her sister.An anonymous call draws Gittes to Ida Sessions's apartment where he finds her murdered, with Escobar waiting for his arrival. Escobar pressures him because the coroner's report found salt water in Mulwray's lungs: the body was moved after death. Escobar suspects Evelyn of the murder, and he insists Gittes produce her quickly or he'll face charges of his own.Gittes returns to Evelyn's mansion, where he discovers a pair of men's eyeglasses in her salt water garden pond and her servants packing her bags. He summons Cross to the Mulwray home to collect his bonus. Convinced that she killed her husband, Gittes confronts Evelyn about the woman she said was her sister; Evelyn claims it is her daughter Katherine. Gittes slaps her repeatedly until she cries out "She's my sister and my daughter!" and haltingly admits to a sexual relationship with her father that began after her mother died. He won't face up to it and for that she hates him. Also, the eyeglasses are not her husband's, she says, since he did not wear bifocals.Gittes makes plans for the two women to flee to Mexico. He instructs Evelyn to meet him at her butler's home in Chinatown, but Cross intercepts him at Mulwray's. Cross admits he intends to incorporate the Northwest Valley into the City of Los Angeles, then irrigate and develop it. Gittes produces the bifocals -- they belong to Cross and link him to Mulwray's murder; Mulvihill appears to confiscate the glasses and force Jake to take them to the women.When the three reach the hiding place in Chinatown, the police are already there and arrest Gittes. Evelyn will not allow Cross to approach Katherine, and when he is undeterred she shoots him in the arm and drives away with Katherine. As the car speeds off, the police open fire, killing Evelyn. Cross clutches Katherine and leads her away, while Escobar orders Gittes released, along with his associates. One of them urges, "Forget it, Jake, it's Chinatown!"In 1971, producer Robert Evans originally offered Towne $175,000 to write a screenplay for The Great Gatsby (1974), but Towne felt he could not better the F. Scott Fitzgerald novel. Instead, Towne asked for $25,000 from Evans to write his own story, Chinatown, to which Evans agreed.[6][7]Chinatown is set in 1937 and portrays the manipulation of a critical municipal resource  water  by a cadre of shadowy oligarchs. It was the first part of Towne's planned trilogy about the character J.J. Gittes, the foibles of the Los Angeles power structure, and the subjugation of public good by private greed.[8] The second part, The Two Jakes, was about another grab for a natural resource  oil  with a thicker-torsoed Gittes in the 1940s. It was directed by Jack Nicholson and released in 1990, but the second film's commercial and critical failure scuttled plans to make Gittes vs. Gittes,[9] about the third finite resource  land  in Los Angeles, circa 1968.[8]The characters Hollis Mulwray and Noah Cross are both references to the chief engineer for the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, William Mulholland (18551935)the name Hollis Mulwray is partially an anagram for Mulholland. The name Noah is a reference to a floodto suggest the conflict between good and evil in Mulholland. Mulholland was the designer and engineer for the Los Angeles Aqueduct, which brought water from the Owens Valley to Los Angeles. For reasons of engineering and safety, Mulwray opposes the dam that Cross and the city want to build. Mulwray says he will not make the same mistake as when he built a previous dam, which broke, resulting in the deaths of hundreds. This is a direct reference to the St. Francis Dam disaster. The dam was personally inspected by Mulholland before it catastrophically failed the next morning on March 12, 1928. More than 450 people, 42 of them schoolchildren, died that day and the town of Santa Paula was inundated with flood water.[10] The incident effectively ended Mulholland's career and he died in 1935. Margaret Leslie Davis, in her 1993 book Rivers in the Desert: William Mulholland and the Inventing of Los Angeles, says the sexually charged film is a metaphor for the "rape" of the Owens Valley. She notes that it fictionalizes Mulholland into a corrupt and sinister character while underplaying the strong public support for Southern California's controversial water projects.Robert Towne says he took the title, and the famous exchange, "What did you do in Chinatown?" / "As little as possible", from a Hungarian vice cop who had worked in Chinatown. The cop explained to Towne that the complicated array of dialects and gangs in Los Angeles's Chinatown made it impossible for the police to know whether their interventions in Chinatown were helping victims or furthering their exploitation. As a consequence, the police decided the best course of action was to do as little as possible.[7]Polanski found out about the script through Nicholson, with whom he had been planning to make a film once they found the right property. Producer Robert Evans wanted Polanski to direct as well, because he wanted a European vision of the United States, which he thought would be darker and more cynical. Polanski, just a few years removed from the murder of his wife in Los Angeles, was initially reluctant to return, but was persuaded to accept the project based on the strength of the script.[7]Towne wrote the screenplay with Nicholson in mind.[7] Evans, the producer, intended the screenplay to have a happy ending with Cross dying and Evelyn Mulwray surviving. Evans and Polanski argued over it, with Polanski insisting on a tragic end. "I knew that if Chinatown was to be special," Polanski said, "not just another thriller where the good guys triumph in the final reel, Evelyn had to die."[11] Evans and Polanski parted ways due to the dispute and Polanski wrote the final scene just a few days before it was shot.[7]The original script was over 180 pages. Polanski eliminated Gittes' voiceover narration, which was written in the script, and structured the movie so the audience discovered the clues at the same time Gittes did.Polanski originally offered the cinematographer position to William A. Fraker, Paramount agreed and Fraker accepted. Paramount had previously hired Fraker to shoot for Polanski on Rosemary's Baby. When Robert Evans became aware of the hiring he insisted the offer be rescinded. Evans, who had also produced Rosemary's Baby, felt pairing Polanski and Fraker created a team with too much power on one side, and would thus complicate the production.Polanski appears in a cameo as the gangster who cuts Gittes' nose. The effect was accomplished with a special knife which indeed could have cut Nicholson's nose if Polanski had not held it correctly. In keeping with the tradition Polanski credits to Raymond Chandler, all of the events of the film are seen subjectively through Gittes's eyes; for example, when Gittes is knocked unconscious, the film fades to black and then fades back in when he awakens. Gittes appears in every scene of the film.[7]The scene at the Noah Cross estate was filmed on Catalina Island, California.Phillip Lambro was originally hired to write the film's music score, but it was rejected at the last minute by producer Robert Evans, leaving Jerry Goldsmith only ten days to write and record a new one. Parts of the original Lambro score can be heard in the original trailer for the movie. The haunting trumpet solos were performed by Hollywood studio musician and MGM first trumpet Uan Rasey. The soundtrack was released through Varse Sarabande on 7 November 1995 and features twelve tracks of score at a running time just over thirty minutes.Goldsmith received an Academy Award nomination for his efforts though he lost to Nino Rota and Carmine Coppola for The Godfather Part II. Terry Teachout of the Wall Street Journal[12] published an article on July 11, 2009 praising Jerry Goldsmith's music for the film, crediting its success to the revised score. The soundtrack to Chinatown is often regarded as one of the greatest scores of all time and ranks in ninth place on the American Film Institute's top 25 American film scores.[13] Filmmaker David Lynch cites Chinatown as his favorite film score of all time.[14]Evans says that the film cemented Jack Nicholson, then a rising star, as one of Hollywood's top leading men.[7]Robert Towne's screenplay for the film has become legendary among critics and filmmakers, often celebrated as one of the best ever written.[8][15][16] However, it was Roman Polanski who decided about filming the fatal final scene, changing Towne's idea of a happy ending.Chinatown brought more public awareness to the land dealings and disputes over water rights which arose while drawing Los Angeles' water supply from the Owens Valley in the 1930s.[17]The film holds a 100% "Certified Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes with 50 reviews.[18] Metacritic assigned a rating of 86/100 based on 10 critic reviews.[19]The film won one Academy Award and was nominated in a further ten categories:[20][21]American Film Institute recognitionJack NicholsonFaye DunawayJohn HustonJune 20, 1974(1974-06-20)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Background
3.2 Origins
3.3 Development
3.4 Characters and casting
3.5 Filming
3.6 Soundtrack

3.1 Background3.2 Origins3.3 Development3.4 Characters and casting3.5 Filming3.6 Soundtrack4 Legacy5 Awards and honors

5.1 Academy Awards  1974
5.2 Golden Globes  1974
5.3 Other awards

5.1 Academy Awards  19745.2 Golden Globes  19745.3 Other awards6 References7 Bibliography8 External links3.1 Background3.2 Origins3.3 Development3.4 Characters and casting3.5 Filming3.6 Soundtrack5.1 Academy Awards  19745.2 Golden Globes  19745.3 Other awardsJack Nicholson as J.J. "Jake" GittesFaye Dunaway as Evelyn Cross MulwrayJohn Huston as Noah CrossPerry Lopez as Lieutenant Lou EscobarJohn Hillerman as Russ YelburtonDarrell Zwerling as Hollis I. MulwrayDiane Ladd as Ida SessionsRoy Jenson as Claude MulvihillRoman Polanski as Man with KnifeRichard Bakalyan as Detective LoachJoe Mantell as Lawrence WalshBruce Glover as DuffyJames Hong as KahnRoy Roberts as Mayor BagbyNoble Willingham as CouncilmanBurt Young as CurlyBelinda Palmer as Katherine Cross"J.J. Gittes" was named after Nicholson's friend, producer Harry Gittes."Evelyn Mulwray" is, according to Towne, intended to initially seem to be the classic "black widow" character typical of lead female characters in film noir, yet is eventually revealed to be the only selfless character in the film. Jane Fonda was strongly considered for the role, but Polanski pushed for Dunaway.[7]"Noah Cross": Towne said that Huston was, after Nicholson, the second-best-cast actor in the film, and that he made the Cross character evil through his charming and courtly performance.[7]Best Original Screenplay  Robert TowneBest Picture  Robert EvansBest Director  Roman PolanskiBest Actor  Jack NicholsonBest Actress  Faye DunawayBest Film Editing  Sam O'SteenBest Art Direction  Richard Sylbert, W. Stewart Campbell, Ruby LevittBest Costume Design  Anthea SylbertBest Cinematography  John A. AlonzoBest Sound Mixing  Bud Grenzbach, Larry JostBest Music Score  Jerry GoldsmithBest Motion Picture  Drama  Robert EvansBest Actor in a Motion Picture  Drama  Jack NicholsonBest Director  Roman PolanskiBest Screenplay  Robert TowneBest Actor in a Supporting Role  John HustonBest Actress  Motion Picture Drama  Faye DunawayBest Original Score  Jerry Goldsmith1975  BAFTA, Best Actor (Nicholson), Best Direction, Best Screenplay (male)1975  Edgar Award, Best Motion Picture Screenplay  Robert Towne1991  National Film Registry2010  Best film of all time, The Guardian[3]1998  AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  #192001  AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills  #162003  AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Noah Cross  #16 Villain
J.J. "Jake" Gittes  Nominated Hero

Noah Cross  #16 VillainJ.J. "Jake" Gittes  Nominated Hero2005  AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"Forget it, Jake, it's Chinatown."  #74
"She's my sister! She's my daughter!"  Nominated

"Forget it, Jake, it's Chinatown."  #74"She's my sister! She's my daughter!"  Nominated2005  AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  #92007  AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #212008  AFI's 10 Top 10  #2 mystery filmNoah Cross  #16 VillainJ.J. "Jake" Gittes  Nominated Hero"Forget it, Jake, it's Chinatown."  #74"She's my sister! She's my daughter!"  NominatedEaston, Michael (1998) Chinatown (B.F.I. Film Classics series). Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 0-85170-532-4.Towne, Robert (1997). Chinatown and the Last Detail: 2 Screenplays. New York: Grove Press. ISBN 0-8021-3401-7.Tuska, Jon (1978). The Detective in Hollywood. Garden City, New York: Doubleday & Company. ISBN 0-385-12093-1.Thomson, David (2004). The Whole Equation: A History of Hollywood. New York, New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 0-375-40016-8.Chinatown at the Internet Movie DatabaseChinatown at the TCM Movie DatabaseChinatown at AllRoviChinatown at Rotten TomatoesTim Dirks' analysis of Chinatown, one of "The Greatest Films"Roger Ebert's complete review of Chinatown conversation with sceenwriter Robert TowneFilm Noir of the Week commentaryLiteratureSan Francisco Chronicle interview with TowneChinatown Third DraftOne Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest is a 1975 drama film directed by Milo Forman and based on the 1962 novel One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest by Ken Kesey.The film was the second to win all five major Academy Awards (Best Picture, Actor in Lead Role, Actress in Lead Role, Director, and Screenplay) following It Happened One Night in 1934, an accomplishment not repeated until 1991 by The Silence of the Lambs.The film is #20 on the American Film Institute's 100 Years... 100 Movies list. It was shot at Oregon State Hospital in Salem, Oregon, which was also the setting of the novel.[3]In 1963 Oregon, Randle Patrick "Mac" McMurphy (Jack Nicholson), a recidivist anti-authoritarian criminal serving a short sentence on a prison farm for statutory rape of a 15-year-old girl, is transferred to a mental institution for evaluation. Although he does not show any overt signs of mental illness, he hopes to avoid hard labor and serve the rest of his sentence in a more relaxed hospital environment.McMurphy's ward is run by steely, unyielding Nurse Mildred Ratched (Louise Fletcher), who employs subtle humiliation, unpleasant medical treatments and a mind-numbing daily routine to suppress the patients. McMurphy finds that they are more fearful of Ratched than they are focused on becoming functional in the outside world. McMurphy establishes himself immediately as the leader; his fellow patients include Billy Bibbit (Brad Dourif), a nervous, stuttering young man; Charlie Cheswick (Sydney Lassick), a man disposed to childish fits of temper; Martini (Danny DeVito), who is delusional; Dale Harding (William Redfield), a high-strung, well-educated paranoid; Max Taber (Christopher Lloyd), who is belligerent and profane; Jim Sefelt (William Duell); and "Chief" Bromden (Will Sampson), a silent American Indian believed to be deaf and mute.McMurphy's and Ratched's battle of wills escalates rapidly. When McMurphy's card games win away everyone's cigarettes, Ratched confiscates the cigarettes and rations them out. McMurphy calls for votes on ward policy changes to challenge her. He makes a show of betting the other patients he can escape by lifting an old hydrotherapy consolea massive marble plumbing fixtureoff the floor and sending it through the window; when he fails to do so, he turns to them and says, "But I tried goddammit. At least I did that."McMurphy steals a hospital bus, herds his colleagues aboard, stops to pick up Candy (Marya Small), a party girl, and takes the group deep sea fishing on a commandeered boat. He tells them: "You're not nuts, you're fishermen!" and they begin to feel faint stirrings of self-determination.Soon after, however, McMurphy learns that Ratched and the doctors have the power to keep him committed indefinitely. Sensing a rising tide of insurrection among the group, Ratched tightens her grip on everyone. During one of her group humiliation sessions, Cheswick's agitation boils over and he, McMurphy and the Chief wind up brawling with the orderlies. They are sent up to the "shock shop" for electroconvulsive therapy. While McMurphy and the Chief wait their turn, McMurphy offers Chief a piece of gum, and Chief murmurs "Thank you." McMurphy is delighted to find that Bromden is neither deaf nor mute, and that he stays silent to deflect attention. After the electroshock therapy, McMurphy shuffles back onto the ward feigning illness, before humorously animating his face and loudly greeting his fellow patients, assuring everyone that the ECT only charged him up all the more and that the next woman to take him on will "light up like a pinball machine and pay off in silver dollars."But the struggle with Ratched is taking its toll, and with his release date no longer a certainty, McMurphy plans an escape. He phones Candy to bring her friend Rose (Louisa Moritz) and some booze to the hospital late one night. They enter through a window after McMurphy bribes the night orderly, Mr. Turkle (Scatman Crothers). McMurphy and Candy invite the patients into the day room for a Christmas party; the group breaks into the drug locker, puts on music, and enjoys a bacchanalian rampage. At the end of the night, McMurphy and Bromden prepare to climb out the window with the girls. McMurphy says goodbye to everyone, and invites an emotional Billy to escape with them; he declines, saying he is not yet ready to leave the hospitalthough he would like to date Candy in the future. McMurphy insists Billy have sex with Candy right then and there. Billy and Candy agree and they retire to a private room. The effects of the alcohol and pilfered medication take their toll on everyone, including McMurphy and the Chief, whose eyes slowly close in fatigue.Nurse Ratched arrives the next morning and discovers the scene: the ward completely upended and patients passed out all over the floor. She orders the attendants to lock the window, clean up, and conduct a head count. When they find Billy and Candy, the other patients applaud and, buoyed, Billy speaks for the first time without a stutter. Nurse Ratched then announces that she will tell Billy's mother what he has done. Billy panics, his stutter returns, and he starts punching himself in the face; locked in the doctor's office, he kills himself. McMurphy, enraged at Nurse Ratched, chokes her nearly to death until orderly Washington knocks him out.Some time later, the patients in the ward play cards and gamble for cigarettes as before, only now with Harding dealing and delivering a pale imitation of McMurphy's patter. Nurse Ratched, still recovering from the neck injury sustained during McMurphy's attack, wears a neck brace and speaks in a thin, reedy voice. The patients pass a whispered rumor that McMurphy dramatically escaped the hospital rather than being taken "upstairs."Late that night, Chief Bromden sees McMurphy being escorted back to his bed, and initially believes that he has returned so they can escape together, which he is now ready to do since McMurphy has made him feel "as big as a mountain." However, when he looks closely at McMurphy's unresponsive face, he is horrified to see lobotomy scars on his forehead. Unwilling to allow McMurphy to live in such a stateor be seen this way by the other patientsthe Chief smothers McMurphy to death with his pillow. He then carries out McMurphy's escape plan by lifting the hydrotherapy console off the floor and hurling the massive fixture through a grated window, climbing through and running off into the distance, with Taber waking up just in time to see the Chief escape and cheering as the others awake.The title is derived from an American children's folk rhyme.[4] In a detail not included in the film, the novel shows it to be a rhyme that Chief Bromden remembers from his childhood.Vintery, mintery, cutery, corn,
Apple seed and apple thorn,
Wire, briar, limber lock
Three geese in a flock
One flew East
One flew West
And one flew over the cuckoo's nest.The film received generally positive reviews from critics; Roger Ebert said that "Milo Forman's One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest is a film so good in so many of its parts that there's a temptation to forgive it when it goes wrong. But it does go wrong, insisting on making larger points than its story really should carry, so that at the end, the human qualities of the characters get lost in the significance of it all. And yet there are those moments of brilliance."[5] Ebert would later put the film on his "Great Movies" list.[6] A.D. Murphy of Variety wrote a mixed review as well,[7] as did Vincent Canby: writing in The New York Times, Canby called the film "a comedy that can't quite support its tragic conclusion, which is too schematic to be honestly moving, but it is acted with such a sense of life that one responds to its demonstration of humanity if not to its programmed metaphors."[8]The film went on to win a total of five Academy Awards, including Best Actor for Jack Nicholson (who played McMurphy), Best Actress for Louise Fletcher (who played Ratched), Best Direction for Forman, Best Picture, and Best Adapted Screenplay for Laurence Hauben and Bo Goldman. The film currently has a 96% "Certified Fresh" rating at Rotten Tomatoes.[9]The film is considered to be one of the greatest American films. Ken Kesey participated in the early stages of script development, but withdrew after creative differences with the producers over casting and narrative point-of-view; ultimately he filed suit against the production and won a settlement.[10] Kesey himself claimed never to have seen the movie, but said he disliked what he knew of it,[11] a fact confirmed by Chuck Palahniuk who wrote, "The first time I heard this story, it was through the movie starring Jack Nicholson. A movie that Kesey once told me he disliked".[12]In 1993, this film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in their National Film Registry.The film was shown in Swedish cinemas for nearly 11 years  between early 1976 and winter of 1986/1987  which is still a record. When Forman learned this, he said, "I'm absolutely thrilled by that... It's wonderful."[citation needed]One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest won all of the "Big Five" Academy Awards at the 48th Oscar ceremonyAmerican Film InstituteNovember 19, 1975(1975-11-19)1 Plot2 Cast3 Title4 Reception5 Awards and honors

5.1 Others

5.1 Others6 See also7 References8 External links5.1 OthersJack Nicholson as Randle McMurphyLouise Fletcher as Nurse RatchedWilliam Redfield as Dale HardingWill Sampson as "Chief" BromdenBrad Dourif as Billy BibbitSydney Lassick as Charlie CheswickDanny DeVito as MartiniChristopher Lloyd as Max TaberDean R. Brooks as Dr. John SpiveyWilliam Duell as Jim SefeltVincent Schiavelli as FredericksonDelos V. Smith as ScanlonMichael Berryman as EllisNathan George as Attendant WashingtonLan Fendors as Nurse ItsuMimi Sarkisian as Nurse PilbowMarya Small as CandyScatman Crothers as Orderly TurkleLouisa Moritz as RoseChristopher Campagna as RucklyAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  #20AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Nurse Ratched  #5 Villain
Randle Patrick McMurphy  Nominated Hero[13]

Nurse Ratched  #5 VillainRandle Patrick McMurphy  Nominated Hero[13]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers  #17AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #33Nurse Ratched  #5 VillainRandle Patrick McMurphy  Nominated Hero[13]Mental illness in filmsOne Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest at the Internet Movie DatabaseOne Flew Over The Cuckoo's Nest at the TCM Movie DatabaseOne Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest at AllRoviOne Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest at Box Office MojoOne Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest at Rotten TomatoesThe Grapes of Wrath is a 1940 drama film directed by John Ford. It was based on John Steinbeck's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel of the same name. The screenplay was written by Nunnally Johnson and the executive producer was Darryl F. Zanuck.[1]The film tells the story of the Joads, an Oklahoma family, who, after losing their farm during the Great Depression in the 1930s, become migrant workers and end up in California. The motion picture details their arduous journey across the United States as they travel to California in search of work and opportunities for the family members.In 1989, this film was one of the first 25 films to be selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."The film opens with Tom Joad (Henry Fonda), released from prison and hitchhiking his way back to his parents' family farm in Oklahoma. Tom finds an itinerant ex-preacher named Jim Casy (John Carradine) sitting under a tree by the side of the road. Casy was the preacher who baptized Tom, but now Casy has "lost the spirit" and his faith (presaging his imminent conversion to communism). Casy goes with Tom to the Joad property only to find it deserted. There, they meet Muley (John Qualen) who is hiding out. In a flashback, he describes how farmers all over the area were forced from their farms by the deed holders of the land. A local boy (Irving Bacon), hired for the purpose, is shown knocking down Muley's house with a Caterpillar tractor. Following this, Tom and Casy move on to find the Joad family at Tom's Uncle John's place. His family is happy to see Tom and explain they have made plans to head for California in search of employment, as their farm has been foreclosed by the bank. The large Joad family of twelve leaves at daybreak, along with Casy who decides to come. They pack everything into a dilapidated 1926 Hudson "Super Six" sedan adapted to serve as a truck in order to make the long journey to the promised land of California.The trip along Highway 66 is arduous, and it soon takes a toll on the Joad family. The elderly Grandpa (Charley Grapewin) dies along the way. After he dies, they pull over to the shoulder of the road, unload him, and bury him. Tom writes the circumstances surrounding the death on a page from the Family Bible and places it on the body so that if his remains were found, his death would not be investigated as a possible homicide. They park in a camp and meet a man, a migrant returning from California, who laughs at Pa's optimism about conditions in California. He speaks bitterly about his experiences in the West.The family arrives at the first transient migrant campground for workers and finds the camp is crowded with other starving, jobless and desperate travelers. Their truck slowly makes its way through the dirt road between the shanty houses and around the camp's hungry-faced inhabitants. Tom says, "Sure don't look none too prosperous."After some trouble with a so-called "agitator," the Joads leave the camp in a hurry. The Joads make their way to another migrant camp, the Keene Ranch. After doing some work in the fields, they discover the high food prices in the company store for meat and other products. The store is the only one in the area, by a long shot. Later they find a group of migrant workers are striking, and Tom wants to find out all about it. He goes to a secret meeting in the dark woods. When the meeting is discovered, Casy is killed by one of the camp guards. As Tom tries to defend Casy from the attack, he inadvertently kills the guard.Tom suffers a serious wound on his cheek, and the camp guards realize it won't be difficult to identify him. That evening the family hides Tom under the mattresses of the truck just as guards arrive to question them; they are searching for the man who killed the guard. Tom avoids being spotted and the family leaves the Keene Ranch without further incident. After driving for a while, they have to stop at the top of a hill when the engine overheats due to a broken fan belt; they have little gas, but decide to try coasting down the hill to some lights. The lights are from a third type of camp: Farmworkers' Wheat Patch Camp (Weedpatch in the book), a clean camp run by the Department of Agriculture, complete with indoor toilets and showers, which the Joad children had never seen before.Tom is moved to work for change by what he has witnessed in the various camps. He tells his family that he plans to carry on Casy's mission in the world by fighting for social reform. He leaves to seek a new world and to join the movement committed to social justice.Tom Joad says:I'll be all around in the dark. I'll be everywhere. Wherever you can look, wherever there's a fight, so hungry people can eat, I'll be there. Wherever there's a cop beatin' up a guy, I'll be there. I'll be in the way guys yell when they're mad. I'll be in the way kids laugh when they're hungry and they know supper's ready, and when the people are eatin' the stuff they raise and livin' in the houses they build, I'll be there, too.As the family moves on again, they discuss the fear and difficulties they have had. Ma Joad concludes the film, saying:I ain't never gonna be scared no more. I was, though. For a while it looked as though we was beat. Good and beat. Looked like we didn't have nobody in the whole wide world but enemies. Like nobody was friendly no more. Made me feel kinda bad and scared too, like we was lost and nobody cared.... Rich fellas come up and they die, and their kids ain't no good and they die out, but we keep on coming. We're the people that live. They can't wipe us out, they can't lick us. We'll go on forever, Pa, cos we're the people.The first part of the film version follows the book fairly accurately. However, the second half and the ending in particular are significantly different from the book. While the book ends with the downfall and break-up of the Joad family, the film switches the order of sequences so that the family ends up in a "good" camp provided by the government, and events turn out relatively well.[citation needed] The novel's original ending was considered far too controversial to be included in the film.[citation needed] In the novel Rose-of-Sharon ("Rosasharn") Rivers (played in the film by Dorris Bowdon) gives birth to a stillborn baby. Later she offers her milk-filled breasts to a starving man, dying in a barn. These scenes were not included in the film.While the film is somewhat stark, it has a more optimistic and hopeful view than the novel, especially when the Joads land at the Department of Agriculture camp  the clean camp.[citation needed] Also, the producers tone down Steinbeck's political references, such as eliminating a monologue using a land owner's description of "reds" as anybody "that wants thirty cents an hour when we're payin' twenty-five," to show that under the prevalent conditions that definition applies to every migrant worker looking for better wages. The film emphasizes Ma Joad's pragmatic, forward-looking way of dealing with their situation despite Tom's departure, as it concludes with her spiritual "We're the people" speech.[citation needed][2]Ivy and Sairy Wilson, who attend to Grandpa's death and travel with the Joads until they reach California, are left out of the movie. Noah's departure from the family is passed over in the movie. In the book, Floyd tells Tom about how the workers were being exploited, but in the movie he does not appear until after the deputy arrives in Hooverville. Sandry, the religious fanatic who scares Rose of Sharon, is left out of the movie.Vivian Sobchack argued that the film uses visual imagery to focus on the Joads as a family unit, whereas the novel focuses on their journey as a part of the "family of man". She points out that their farm is never shown in detail, and that the family members are never shown working in agriculture; not a single peach is shown in the entire film. This subtly serves to focus the film on the specific family, as opposed to the novel's focus on man and land together.[3]Darryl Hickman is the last surviving cast member.According to critic Roger Ebert, both executive producer Darryl F. Zanuck and director John Ford were odd choices to make this film because both were considered politically conservative.[4] Zanuck was nervous about the left-wing political views of the novel, especially the ending. Due to the red-baiting common to the era, Daryl Zanuck sent private investigators to Oklahoma to help him legitimize the film. When Zanuck's investigators found that the "Okies'" predicament was indeed terrible, Zanuck was confident he could defend political attacks that the film was somehow pro-Communist.[5] Ebert believes that World War II also helped sell the film's message, as Communism received a brief respite from American demonizing during that period.[4]Production on the film began on October 4, 1939, and was completed on November 16, 1939. Some of the filming locations include: McAlester, Sayre both in Oklahoma; Gallup, Laguna Pueblo, and Santa Rosa, all in New Mexico; Lamont, Needles, San Fernando Valley, all in California; Topock, Petrified Forest National Park, all in Arizona.[6]The film score by Alfred Newman is based on the song "Red River Valley". Additionally, the song "Goin' Down The Road Feelin' Bad" is sung in a nighttime scene at a labor camp.The film premiered in New York City on January 24, 1940, and Los Angeles on January 27, 1940. The wide release date in the United States was March 15, 1940.The film was banned in the Soviet Union (USSR) by Joseph Stalin after being shown in Poland because of the depiction that even the poorest Americans could afford a car.[7]When released, the film was well received by the film critics, but it did have its detractors, especially because of its leftist political overtones. Film critic Frank S. Nugent, writing for The New York Times, liked the film's screenplay, the direction of the film and the acting. He wrote, "In the vast library where the celluloid literature of the screen is stored there is one small, uncrowded shelf devoted to the cinema's masterworks, to those films which by dignity of theme and excellence of treatment seem to be of enduring artistry, seem destined to be recalled not merely at the end of their particular year but whenever great motion pictures are mentioned. To that shelf of screen classics Twentieth Century-Fox yesterday added its version of John Steinbeck's The Grapes of Wrath, adapted by Nunnally Johnson, directed by John Ford and performed at the Rivoli by a cast of such uniform excellence and suitability that we should be doing its other members an injustice by saying it was 'headed' by Henry Fonda, Jane Darwell, John Carradine and Russell Simpson."[8]When critic Bosley Crowther retired in 1967, he named The Grapes of Wrath one of the best fifty films ever made. (N.B.: 40% of the works Crowther named were not American-made, so he was placing this work in a large context.)[9]In a film review written for Time magazine by its editor Whittaker Chambers, he separated his views of Steinbeck's novel from Ford's film, which he liked. Chambers wrote, "But people who go to pictures for the sake of seeing pictures will see a great one. For The Grapes of Wrath is possibly the best picture ever made from a so-so book...Camera craft purged the picture of the editorial rash that blotched the Steinbeck book. Cleared of excrescences, the residue is a great human story which made thousands of people, who damned the novel's phony conclusions, read it. It is the saga of an authentic U.S. farming family who lose their land. They wander, they suffer, but they endure. They are never quite defeated, and their survival is itself a triumph."[10]Academy Awards wins (1941)[11]Academy Awards nominations (1941)Other winsAmerican Film Institute recognitionA video of the film was released in 1988 by Key Video (then a division of CBS/Fox).Later it was released in video format on March 3, 1998 by 20th Century Fox on its Studio Classic series.A DVD was released on April 6, 2004 by 20th Century Fox Entertainment. The DVD contains a special commentary track by scholars Joseph McBride and Susan Shillinglaw. It also includes various supplements: an A&E Network biography of Daryl F. Zanuck, outtakes, a gallery, Franklin D. Roosevelt lauds motion pictures at Academy featurette, Movietone news: three drought reports from 1934, etc.January 24, 1940(1940-01-24)1 Plot

1.1 Differences from the novel

1.1 Differences from the novel2 Cast3 Soundtrack4 Production5 Reception

5.1 Critical response
5.2 Awards

5.1 Critical response5.2 Awards6 Video and DVD7 References8 External links1.1 Differences from the novel5.1 Critical response5.2 AwardsHenry Fonda as Tom JoadRussell Simpson as Pa JoadJane Darwell as Ma JoadJohn Carradine as Jim Casy, former preacherCharley Grapewin as Grandpa William James JoadZeffie Tilbury as Grandma JoadFrank Darien as Uncle John JoadDorris Bowdon as Rose-of-Sharon "Rosasharn" RiversO.Z. Whitehead as Al JoadFrank Sully as Noah JoadDarryl Hickman as Winfield JoadShirley Mills as Ruthie JoadEddie Quillan as Connie Rivers, husband of RosasharnJohn Qualen as Muley Graves, neighbor in OklahomaRoger Imhof as Mr. Thomas, ditch employerGrant Mitchell as Manager of government campCharles D. Brown as Wilkie, boy lookout at danceJohn Arledge as Davis, bulldozer driverWard Bond as Friendly Policeman, BakersfieldEddie Waller as ProprietorMax Wagner as GuardHenry Fonda  "Red River Valley"Eddie Quillan  "Going Down the Road Feeling Bad" (Traditional)"A Tisket, A Tasket" (Words & music by Ella Fitzgerald & Van Alexander)Best Supporting Actress, Jane Darwell as Ma Joad.Academy Award for Directing, John Ford.Best Actor in a Leading Role, Henry Fonda as Tom Joad.Best Film Editing, Robert L. Simpson.Best Picture, Darryl F. Zanuck and Nunnally Johnson.Best Sound Recording, Edmund H. Hansen.Best Writing Adapted Screenplay, Nunnally Johnson.National Board of Review of Motion Pictures: NBR Award; Best Picture- 1940.New York Film Critics: NYFCC Award; Best Director, John Ford; Best Film- 1940.Blue Ribbon Awards, Japan: Blue Ribbon Award Best Foreign Language Film, John Ford- 1963.National Film Registry  1989.AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  #21AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Tom Joad  #12 Hero

Tom Joad  #12 HeroAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Wherever there's a fight so hungry people can eat, I'll be there."  Nominated

"Wherever there's a fight so hungry people can eat, I'll be there."  Nominated100 Years...100 Cheers  #7100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary)  #23Tom Joad  #12 Hero"Wherever there's a fight so hungry people can eat, I'll be there."  NominatedThe Grapes of Wrath at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Grapes of Wrath at Rotten TomatoesThe Grapes of Wrath at Film Site by Tim DirksThe Grapes of Wrath video film review by A. O. Scott (The New York Times) at YouTube2001: A Space Odyssey is a 1968 science fiction film produced and directed by Stanley Kubrick. The screenplay was co-written by Kubrick and Arthur C. Clarke, and was partially inspired by Clarke's short story "The Sentinel". Clarke concurrently wrote the novel of the same name which was published soon after the film was released. The story deals with a series of encounters between humans and mysterious black monoliths that are apparently affecting human evolution, and a space voyage to Jupiter tracing a signal emitted by one such monolith found on the moon. Keir Dullea and Gary Lockwood star as the two astronauts on this voyage, with Douglas Rain as the voice of the sentient computer HAL 9000 who has full control over their spaceship. The film is frequently described as an "epic film", both for its length and scope, and for its affinity with classical epics.[2][3]Produced and distributed by the American studio Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, the film was made almost entirely in England, using both the studio facilities of MGM's subsidiary "MGM British" (among the last movies to be shot there before its closure in 1970)[4] and those of Shepperton Studios, mostly because of the availability of much larger sound stages than in the United States. The film was also co-produced by Kubrick's own "Stanley Kubrick Productions". Kubrick, having already shot his previous two films in England, decided to settle there permanently during the filming of Space Odyssey. Though Space Odyssey was released in the United States over a month before its release in the United Kingdom, and Encyclopdia Britannica calls this an American film,[5] other sources refer to it as an American, British, or American-British production.[6]Thematically, the film deals with elements of human evolution, technology, artificial intelligence, and extraterrestrial life. It is notable for its scientific accuracy, pioneering special effects, ambiguous imagery that is open-ended, sound in place of traditional narrative techniques, and minimal use of dialogue.The film has a memorable soundtrackthe result of the association that Kubrick made between the spinning motion of the satellites and the dancers of waltzes, which led him to use The Blue Danube waltz by Johann Strauss II,[7] and the symphonic poem Also sprach Zarathustra by Richard Strauss, to portray the philosophical concept of the bermensch in Nietzsche's work of the same name.[8][9]Despite initially receiving mixed reactions from critics and audiences alike, 2001: A Space Odyssey garnered a cult following and slowly became a box office hit. Some years after its initial release, it eventually became the highest grossing picture from 1968 in North America. Today it is near-universally recognized by critics, filmmakers, and audiences as one of the greatest and most influential films ever made. The 2002 Sight & Sound poll of critics ranked it among the top ten films of all time,[10] placing it #6 behind Tokyo Story. The film retained sixth place on the critics' list in 2012, and was named the second greatest film ever made by the directors' poll of the same magazine.[11] Two years before that, it was ranked the greatest film of all time by The Moving Arts Film Journal.[12] It was nominated for four Academy Awards, and received one for its visual effects. In 1991, it was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.[13]In 1984, a sequel directed by Peter Hyams was produced titled 2010: The Year We Make Contact.The film consists of four major sections, all of which, except the second, are introduced by superimposed titles.A tribe of herbivorous early hominids is foraging for food in the African desert. A leopard kills one member, and another tribe of man-apes drives them from their water hole. Defeated, they sleep overnight in a small exposed rock crater, and awake to find a black monolith has appeared in front of them. They approach it shrieking and jumping, and eventually touch it cautiously. Soon after, one of the man-apes (Daniel Richter) realizes how to use a bone as both a tool and a weapon, which they start using to kill prey for their food. Growing increasingly capable and assertive, they reclaim control of the water hole from the other tribe by killing its leader. Triumphant, the tribe's leader throws his weapon-tool into the air as the scene shifts (via match cut) from the falling bone to an orbital satellite millions of years in the future.[15][16]A Pan Am space plane carries Dr. Heywood R. Floyd (William Sylvester) to a space station orbiting Earth for a layover on his trip to Clavius Base, a US outpost on the Moon. After making a videophone call from the station to his daughter (Vivian Kubrick), he encounters his friend Elena (Margaret Tyzack), a Russian scientist, and her colleague Dr. Smyslov (Leonard Rossiter), who ask Floyd about "odd things" occurring at Clavius, and the rumor of a mysterious epidemic at the base. Floyd politely but firmly declines to answer any questions about the epidemic, claiming he is "not at liberty to discuss this".At Clavius, Floyd heads a meeting of base personnel, apologizing for the epidemic cover story but stressing secrecy. His mission is to investigate a recently found artifact"Tycho Magnetic Anomaly One" (TMA-1)"deliberately buried" four million years ago. Floyd and others ride in a Moonbus to the artifact, a black monolith identical to the one encountered by the apes. The visitors examine the monolith, and pose for a photo in front of it. While doing so, they hear a very loud high-pitched radio signal emanating from within the monolith.Eighteen months later, the American spaceship Discovery One is bound for Jupiter. On board are mission pilots and scientists Dr. David Bowman (Keir Dullea) and Dr. Frank Poole (Gary Lockwood), and three other scientists who are in cryogenic hibernation. Most of Discovery's operations are controlled by the ship's computer, HAL 9000 (voiced by Douglas Rain), or simply "Hal", as the crew call it. While Bowman and Poole watch Hal and themselves being interviewed in a BBC show about the mission, the computer states that he is "foolproof and incapable of error." Hal also speaks of its enthusiasm for the mission, and how he enjoys working with humans. When asked by the host if Hal has genuine emotions, Bowman replies that he appears to, but that the truth is unknown.Hal asks Bowman about the unusual mystery and secrecy surrounding the mission, but then interrupts himself to report the imminent failure of a device which controls the ship's main antenna. After retrieving the component with an EVA pod, the astronauts cannot find anything wrong with it. Hal suggests reinstalling the part and letting it fail so the problem can be found. Mission control concurs, but advises the astronauts that results from their twin Hal 9000 indicate the ship's Hal is in error predicting the fault. When queried, Hal insists that the problem, like all previous issues with the HAL series, is due to "human error". Concerned about Hal's behavior, Bowman and Poole enter one of the EVA pods to talk without the computer overhearing them. They both have suspicions about Hal, despite the perfect reliability of the HAL series, but they decide to follow its suggestion to replace the unit. As the astronauts agree to disconnect Hal if it is proven to be wrong, they are unaware that Hal is reading their lips through the pod's window.While Poole is attempting to replace the unit during a spacewalk, his EVA pod, controlled by Hal, severs his oxygen hose and sets him adrift. Bowman, not realizing the computer is responsible for this, takes another pod to attempt a rescue, leaving his helmet behind. While he is gone, Hal turns off the life-support functions of the crewmen in suspended animation. When Bowman returns to the ship with Poole's body, Hal refuses to let him in, stating that the astronaut's plan to deactivate him jeopardizes the mission. Bowman manually opens the ship's emergency airlock and bodily enters the ship risking death from exposure to a vacuum. After donning a helmet, Bowman proceeds to Hal's processor core intent on disconnecting most of the functions of the computer. Hal first tries to reassure Dave, then pleads with him to stop, and finally begins to express fearall in a steady monotone voice. Dave ignores him and disconnects each of the computer's processor modules. Hal eventually regresses to his earliest programmed memory, the song "Daisy Bell", which he sings for Bowman.When the computer is finally disconnected, a prerecorded video message from Floyd plays. In it, he reveals the existence of the four million-year-old black monolith on the Moon, "its origin and purpose still a total mystery". Floyd adds that it has remained completely inert, except for a single, very powerful radio emission aimed at Jupiter.At Jupiter, Bowman leaves Discovery One in an EVA pod and finds another monolith in orbit around the planet. Approaching it, the pod is suddenly pulled into a tunnel of colored light,[17] and a disoriented and terrified Bowman finds himself racing at great speed across vast distances of space, viewing bizarre cosmological phenomena and strange alien landscapes of unusual colors. He finds himself, middle-aged and still in his spacesuit, standing in a bedroom appointed in the Louis XVI-style. Bowman sees progressively older versions of himself, his point of view switching each time, alternately appearing formally dressed and eating dinner, and finally as a very elderly man lying in a bed. A black monolith appears at the foot of the bed, and as Bowman reaches for it, he is transformed into a fetus-like being enclosed in a transparent orb of light.[18] The new being floats in space beside the Earth, gazing at it.Shortly after completing Dr. Strangelove (1964), Stanley Kubrick became fascinated by the possibility of extraterrestrial life,[20] and determined to make "the proverbial good science fiction movie".[21] Searching for a suitable collaborator in the science fiction community, Kubrick was advised to seek out the noted science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke by a mutual acquaintance, Columbia Pictures staffer Roger Caras. Although convinced that Clarke was "a recluse, a nut who lives in a tree", Kubrick agreed that Caras would cable the Ceylon-based author with the film proposal. Clarke's cabled response stated that he was "frightfully interested in working with enfant terrible", and added "what makes Kubrick think I'm a recluse?"[22] Meeting for the first time at Trader Vic's in New York on April 22, 1964, the two began discussing the project that would take up the next four years of their lives.[23]Kubrick told Clarke he was searching for the best way to make a movie about Man's relation to the universe, and was, in Clarke's words, "determined to create a work of art which would arouse the emotions of wonder, awe,...even, if appropriate, terror".[24] Clarke offered Kubrick six of his short stories, and by May, Kubrick had chosen one of them"The Sentinel"as source matter for his film. In search of more material to expand the film's plot, the two spent the rest of 1964 reading books on science and anthropology, screening science fiction movies, and brainstorming ideas.[25] Clarke and Kubrick spent two years transforming "The Sentinel" into a novel, and then into a script for 2001.[26] Clarke notes that his short story "Encounter in the Dawn" inspired the "Dawn Of Man" sequence in 2001.[27]At first, Kubrick and Clarke privately referred to their project as How the Solar System Was Won as an homage to MGM's 1962 Cinerama epic, How the West Was Won. However, Kubrick chose to announce the project, in a press release issued on February 23, 1965, as Journey Beyond The Stars.[28] "Other titles which we ran up and failed to salute were Universe, Tunnel to the Stars, and Planetfall", Clarke wrote in his book The Lost Worlds of 2001. "It was not until eleven months after we startedApril 1965that Stanley selected 2001: A Space Odyssey. As far as I can recall, it was entirely his idea."[29] Intending to set the film apart from the standard "monsters and sex" type of science-fiction movies of the time, Kubrick used Homer's The Odyssey as inspiration for the title. "It occurred to us", he said, "that for the Greeks the vast stretches of the sea must have had the same sort of mystery and remoteness that space has for our generation".[30]The collaborators originally planned to develop a novel first, free of the constraints of a normal script, and then to write the screenplay; they envisaged that the final writing credits would be "Screenplay by Stanley Kubrick and Arthur C. Clarke, based on a novel by Arthur C. Clarke and Stanley Kubrick" to reflect their preeminence in their respective fields.[31] In practice, however, the cinematic ideas required for the screenplay developed parallel to the novel, with cross-fertilization between the two. In a 1970 interview with Joseph Gelmis, Kubrick explained:In the end, the screenplay credits were shared while the novel, released shortly after the film, was attributed to Clarke alone, but Clarke wrote later that "the nearest approximation to the complicated truth" is that the screenplay should be credited to "Kubrick and Clarke" and the novel to "Clarke and Kubrick".[33]Clarke and Kubrick wrote the novel and screenplay simultaneously, but while Clarke ultimately opted for clearer explanations of the mysterious monolith and Star Gate in his book, Kubrick chose to make his film more cryptic and enigmatic by keeping dialogue and specific explanations to a minimum.[9] "2001", Kubrick says, "is basically a visual, nonverbal experience" that avoids the spoken word in order to reach the viewer's subconscious in an essentially poetic and philosophic way. The film is a subjective experience which "hits the viewer at an inner level of consciousness, just as music does, or painting".[34]Astronomer Carl Sagan wrote in his book, The Cosmic Connection, that Clarke and Kubrick asked his opinion on how to best depict extraterrestrial intelligence. Sagan, while acknowledging Kubrick's desire to use actors to portray humanoid aliens for convenience's sake, argued that alien life forms were unlikely to bear any resemblance to terrestrial life, and that to do so would introduce "at least an element of falseness" to the film. Sagan proposed that the film suggest, rather than depict, extraterrestrial superintelligence. He attended the premiere and was "pleased to see that I had been of some help."[35] Kubrick hinted at the nature of the mysterious unseen alien race in 2001 by suggesting, in a 1968 interview, that given millions of years of evolution, they progressed from biological beings to "immortal machine entities", and then into "beings of pure energy and spirit"; beings with "limitless capabilities and ungraspable intelligence".[36]Arthur C. Clarke kept a diary throughout his involvement with 2001, excerpts of which were published in 1972 as The Lost Worlds of 2001. The script went through many stages of development in which various plot ideas were considered and subsequently discarded. Early in 1965, right when backing was secured for Journey Beyond the Stars, the writers still had no firm idea of what would happen to Bowman after the Star Gate sequence, though as early as October 17, 1964 Kubrick had come up with what Clarke called a "wild idea of slightly fag robots who create a Victorian environment to put our heroes at their ease".[33] Initially all of Discovery's astronauts were to survive the journey; a decision to leave Bowman as the sole survivor and have him regress to infancy was agreed by October 3, 1965. The computer HAL 9000 was originally to have been named "Athena", after the Greek goddess of wisdom, with a feminine voice and persona.[33]Early drafts included a short prologue containing interviews with scientists about extraterrestrial life,[37] voice-over narration (a feature in all of Kubrick's previous films),[38] a stronger emphasis on the prevailing Cold War balance of terror, a slightly different and more explicitly explained scenario for Hal's breakdown,[39][40][41] and a differently envisaged monolith for the "Dawn of Man" sequence. The last three of these survived into Arthur C. Clarke's final novel, which also retained an earlier draft's employment of Saturn as the final destination of the Discovery mission rather than Jupiter, and the discarded finale of the Star Child exploding nuclear weapons carried by Earth-orbiting satellites.[41] Clarke had suggested this finale to Kubrick, jokingly calling it "Son of Dr. Strangelove"; a reference to Kubrick's previous film. Feeling that this conclusion's similarity to that of his previous film would be detrimental, Kubrick opted for a more pacific conclusion.[37]Some changes were made simply due to the logistics of filming. Early prototypes of the monolith did not photograph well, while the special effects team was unable to develop a convincing rendition of Saturn's rings; hence the switch to Jupiter.[42] (In his foreword to the 1990 edition of the novel, Clarke noted that if they had remained with Saturn, the film would have become far more dated as Voyager revealed that Saturn's rings were far more visually bizarre in closeup than anyone had imagined.) Other changes were made due to Stanley Kubrick's increasing desire to make the film more non-verbal, reaching the viewer at a visual and visceral level rather than through conventional narrative.[43] Vincent LeBrutto notes that Clarke's novel has "strong narrative structure" which fleshes out the story, while the film is a mainly visual experience where much remains "symbolic".[44]While many ideas were discarded in totality, at least two remnants of previous plot ideas remain in the final film.While the film leaves it mysterious, early script drafts spell out that Hal's breakdown is triggered by authorities on Earth who had ordered it to withhold information from the astronauts about the true purpose of the mission. (This is also explained in the film's sequel 2010.) Frederick Ordway, Kubrick's science advisor and technical consultant, working from personal copies of early drafts, stated that in an earlier version, Poole tells Hal there is "...something about this mission that we weren't told. Something the rest of the crew knows and that you know. We would like to know whether this is true", to which HAL enigmatically responds: "I'm sorry, Frank, but I don't think I can answer that question without knowing everything that all of you know."[39] In this version, Hal then falsely predicts a failure of the hardware maintaining radio contact with the Earth (the source of Hal's difficult orders) during the broadcast of Frank Poole's birthday greetings from his parents.While the film drops this overt explanation, it is hinted at when Hal asks David Bowman if the latter feels bothered or disturbed by the "mysteries" and "secrecy" surrounding the mission and its preparations. After Bowman concludes that Hal is dutifully drawing up the "crew psychology report", the computer then makes its false prediction of hardware failure.In an interview with Joseph Gelmis in 1969, Kubrick simply stated that "[Hal] had an acute emotional crisis because he could not accept evidence of his own fallibility"[45]Another holdover of discarded plot ideas is with regard to the famous match-cut from prehistoric bone-weapon to orbiting satellite, followed sequentially by views of three more satellites. At first, Kubrick planned to have a narrator state explicitly that these were armed nuclear weapon platforms while speaking of a nuclear stalemate between the superpowers.[46]This would have foreshadowed the now-discarded conclusion of the film showing the Star Child's detonating all of them.[47] Piers Bizony, in his book 2001 Filming The Future, stated that after ordering designs for orbiting nuclear weapon platforms, Kubrick became convinced to avoid too many associations with Dr. Strangelove, and he decided not to make it so obvious that they were "war machines".[48]Alexander Walker, in a book he wrote with Kubrick's assistance and authorization, described the bone as "transformed into a spacecraft of the year A.D. 2001 as it orbits in the blackness around Earth", and he stated that Kubrick eliminated from his film the theme of a nuclear stalemate between the United States and the Soviet Union, each with globe-orbiting nuclear weapons. Kubrick now thought this had "no place at all in the film's thematic development", with the bombs now becoming an "orbiting red herring". Walker further noted that some filmgoers in 1968-69 would know that an agreement had been reached in 1967 between the powers not to put any nuclear weapons into outer space, and that if the film suggested otherwise, it would "merely have raised irrelevant questions to suggest this as a reality of the twenty-first century".[49]In the Canadian TV documentary 2001 and Beyond, Dr. Clarke stated that not only was the military purpose of the satellites "not spelled out in the film, there is no need for it to be", repeating later in this documentary that "Stanley didn't want to have anything to do with bombs after Dr. Strangelove".[50]In a New York Times interview in 1968, Kubrick merely referred to the satellites as "spacecraft", as does the interviewer, but he observed that the match-cut from bone to spacecraft shows they evolved from "bone-as-weapon", stating "It's simply an observable fact that all of man's technology grew out of his discovery of the weapon-tool".[51]Nothing in the film calls attention to the purpose of the satellites. James John Griffith, in a footnote in his book Adaptations As Imitations: Films from Novels, wrote "I would wonder, for instance, how several critics, commenting on the match-cut that links humanity's prehistory and future, can identify  without reference to Clarke's novel  the satellite as a nuclear weapon".[52]Arthur C. Clarke, in the TV documentary "2001: The Making Of A Myth", described the bone-to-satellite sequence in the film, saying "The bone goes up and turns into what is supposed to be an orbiting space bomb, a weapon in space. Well, that isn't made clear, we just assume it's some kind of space vehicle in a three-million-year jump cut".[53][54] Former NASA research assistant Steven Pietrobon[55] wrote "The orbital craft seen as we make the leap from the Dawn of Man to contemporary times are supposed to be weapons platforms carrying nuclear devices, though the movie does not make this clear."[56]The vast majority of film critics, including noted Kubrick authority Michel Ciment,[57] interpreted the satellites as generic spacecraft (possibly Moon bound).[58]The perception that the satellites are nuclear weapons persists in the minds of some viewers (and some space scientists). However, due to their appearance there are statements by members of the production staff who still refer to them as weapons. Walker, in his book Stanley Kubrick, Director, noted that although the bombs no longer fit in with Kubrick's revised thematic concerns (thus becoming "red herrings"), "nevertheless from the national markings still visible on the first and second space vehicles we see, we can surmise that they are the Russian and American bombs."[59]Similarly, Walker in a later essay[60] stated that two of the spacecraft seen circling Earth were meant to be nuclear weapons, after asserting that early scenes of the film "imply" nuclear stalemate. Pietrobon, who was a consultant on 2001 to the Web site Starship Modeler regarding the film's props, observes small details on the satellites such as Air Force insignia and "cannons".[61]In the film, U.S. Air Force insignia, and flag insignia of China and Germany (including what appears to be an Iron Cross) can be seen on three of the satellites,[62] which correspond to three of the bombs stated countries of origin in a widely circulated early draft of the script.[63]Production staff who continue to refer to "bombs" (in addition to Clarke) include production designer Harry Lange (previously a space industry illustrator), who has since the film's release shown his original production sketches for all of the spacecraft to Simon Atkinson, who refers to seeing "the orbiting bombs".[64] Fred Ordway, the film's science consultant, sent a memo to Kubrick after the film's release listing suggested changes to the film, mostly complaining about missing narration and shortened scenes. One entry reads: "Without warning, we cut to the orbiting bombs. And to a short, introductory narration, missing in the present version".[39] Multiple production staff aided in the writing of Jerome Agel's 1970 book on the making of the film, in which captions describe the objects as "orbiting satellites carrying nuclear weapons"[65] Actor Gary Lockwood (astronaut Frank Poole) in the audio DVD commentary[66] says the first satellite is an armed weapon, thus making the famous match-cut from bone to satellite a "weapon-to-weapon cut". Several recent reviews of the film mostly of the DVD release refer to armed satellites,[67] possibly influenced by Gary Lockwood's audio commentary.A few published works by scientists on the subject of space exploration or space weapons tangentially discuss 2001: A Space Odyssey and assume at least some of the orbiting satellites are space weapons.[68][69] Indeed, details worked out with input from space industry experts, such as the structure on the first satellite that Pietrobon refers to as a "conning tower", match the original concept sketch drawn for the nuclear bomb platform.[56][70] Modelers label them in diverse ways. On the one hand, the 2001 exhibit (given in that year) at the Tech Museum in San Jose and now online (for a subscription) referred merely to "satellites",[71] while a special modeling exhibition at the exhibition hall at Porte de Versailles in Paris also held in 2001 (called 2001 l'odysse des maquettes (2001: A Modeler's Odyssey)) overtly described their reconstructions of the first satellite as the "US Orbiting Weapons Platform".[72] Some, but not all, space model manufacturers or amateur model builders refer to these entities as bombs.[73]How one views the satellites may affect one's reading of the film. Noted Kubrick authority Michel Ciment, in discussing Kubrick's attitude toward human aggression and instinct, observes "The bone cast into the air by the ape (now become a man) is transformed at the other extreme of civilization, by one of those abrupt ellipses characteristic of the director, into a spacecraft on its way to the moon."[74] In contrast to Ciment's reading of a cut to a serene "other extreme of civilization", science fiction novelist Robert Sawyer, speaking in the Canadian documentary 2001 and Beyond, sees it as a cut from a bone to a nuclear weapons platform, explaining that "what we see is not how far we've leaped ahead, what we see is that today, '2001', and four million years ago on the African veldt, it's exactly the samethe power of mankind is the power of its weapons. It's a continuation, not a discontinuity in that jump."[50]Kubrick, notoriously reluctant to provide any explanation of his work, never publicly stated the intended functions of the orbiting satellites, preferring instead to let the viewer surmise what their purpose might be.Alongside its use of music, the lack of dialogue and conventional narrative cues in 2001 has been noted by many reviewers.[75] There is no dialogue at all for the entirety of both the first and last 20 minutes or so of the film; the total narrative of these sections is carried entirely by images, actions, sound effects, a great deal of music (See Music) and two title cards. The first line of dialogue is the space-station stewardess addressing Heywood Floyd saying "Here you are, sir. Main level D." The final line is Floyd's conclusion of the pre-recorded Jupiter mission briefing about the monolith. "Except for a single, very powerful radio emission, aimed at Jupiter, the four-million-year-old black monolith has remained completely inert, its origin and purpose still a total mystery."Only when the film moves into the postulated future of 2000 and 2001, does the viewer encounter characters who speak. By the time shooting began, Kubrick had deliberately jettisoned much of the intended dialogue and narration and what remains is notable for its apparent banality (making the computer Hal seem to have more human emotion than the actual humans), while it is juxtaposed with epic scenes of space.[76] The first scenes of dialogue are Floyd's three encounters on the space station. They are preceded by the space docking sequence choreographed to Strauss' The Blue Danube waltz and followed by a second extended sequence of his travel to the Moon with more Strauss, the two sequences acting as bookends to his space-station stopover. In the stopover itself, we get idle chit-chat with the colleague who greets him followed by Floyd's slightly more affectionate phone call to his daughter, and the distantly friendly but awkwardly strained encounter with Soviet scientists. Later, en route to the monolith, Floyd engages in trite exchanges with his staff while we see a spectacular journey by Earthlight across the Moon's surface. Generally, the most memorable dialogue in the film belongs to the computer Hal in its exchanges with David Bowman.[77] Hal is the only character in the film who openly expresses anxiety (primarily around his disconnection), as well as feelings of pride and bewilderment.The Russian documentary film maker Pavel Klushantsev made a groundbreaking film in the 1950s entitled Road to the Stars. It is believed to have significantly influenced Kubrick's technique in 2001: A Space Odyssey, particularly in its accurate depiction of weightlessness and a rotating space station. Encyclopedia Astronautica describes some scenes from 2001 as a "shot-for-shot duplication of Road to the Stars".[78] Specific comparisons of shots from the two films have been analyzed by the filmmaker Alessandro Cima.[79] A 1994 article in American Cinematographer says, "When Stanley Kubrick made '2001: a Space Odyssey' in 1968, he claimed to have been first to fly actor/astronauts on wires with the camera on the ground, shooting vertically while the actor's body covered the wires" but observes that Klushantsev had preceded him in this.[80]Art critics have noticed the similarities between Kubrick's monolith and a recurring monolith motif in the artwork of French painter Georges Yatrides. Arthur Conte suggests that Yatrides "Adolescent and child" canvas painted in 1963 has a slab remarkably similar to that of Kubrick.[81][82] In Yatrides artwork, the monolith acts as a mystical symbol, mediating superior knowledge. Sacha Bourmeyster a semiology specialist, states[83] that the Yatrides slab communicates supernatural life in a manner similar to that in 2001. Sacha Bourmeyster has also noted the similarity in his book Interstellar Icons.[82][84] Similarities between Yatrides art and Kubrick's monolith have also been noted in the French architecture website CYBERARCHItecte.[85]Principal photography began December 29, 1965, in Stage H at Shepperton Studios, Shepperton, England. The studio was chosen because it could house the 60'x 120'x 60' pit for the Tycho crater excavation scene, the first to be shot.[86][87] The production moved in January 1966 to the smaller MGM-British Studios in Borehamwood, where the live action and special effects filming was done, starting with the scenes involving Floyd on the Orion spaceplane;[88] it was described as a "huge throbbing nerve center... with much the same frenetic atmosphere as a Cape Kennedy blockhouse during the final stages of Countdown."[89] The only scene not filmed in a studioand the last live-action scene shot for the filmwas the skull-smashing sequence, in which Moonwatcher (Richter) wields his new-found bone "weapon-tool" against a pile of nearby animal bones. A small elevated platform was built in a field near the studio so that the camera could shoot upward with the sky as background, avoiding cars and trucks passing by in the distance.[19][90]Filming of actors was completed in September 1967,[91] and from June 1966 until March 1968 Kubrick spent most of his time working on the 205 special effects shots in the film.[92] The director ordered the special effects technicians on 2001 to use the painstaking process of creating all visual effects seen in the film "in camera", avoiding degraded picture quality from the use of blue screen and traveling matte techniques. Although this technique, known as "held takes", resulted in a much better image, it meant exposed film would be stored for long periods of time between shots, sometimes as long as a year.[93] In March 1968, Kubrick finished the 'pre-premiere' editing of the film, making his final cuts just days before the film's general release in April 1968.[92]The film was initially planned to be photographed in 3-film-strip Cinerama (like How the West Was Won), because it was a part of a production/distribution deal between MGM and Cinerama Releasing corporation, but that was changed to Super Panavision 70 (which uses a single-strip 65mm negative) on the advice of special photographic effects supervisor Douglas Trumbull, due to distortion problems with the 3-strip system.[94] Color processing and 35mm release prints were done using Technicolor's dye transfer process. The 70mm prints were made by MGM Laboratories, Inc. on Metrocolor. The production was $4.5 million over the initial $6.0 million budget, and sixteen months behind schedule.[87]Kubrick involved himself in every aspect of production, even choosing the fabric for his actors' costumes,[95] and selecting notable pieces of contemporary furniture for use in the film. When Floyd exits the Space Station V elevator, he is greeted by an attendant seated behind a slightly modified George Nelson Action Office desk from Herman Miller's 1964 "Action Office" series.[96] First introduced in 1968, the Action Office style "cubicle" would eventually occupy 70 percent of office space by the mid-2000s.[97][98] Noted Danish designer Arne Jacobsen designed the cutlery used by the Discovery astronauts in the film.[99][100][101]Perhaps the most noted pieces of furniture in the film are the bright red Djinn Chairs seen prominently throughout the Space Station.[102][103] Designed by Olivier Mourgue in 1965, the Djinn chair is one of the most recognizable chair designs of the 1960s, at least partly due to their visibility in the film.[102] Today the chairs, particularly in red, are highly sought-after examples of modern furniture design.[102] Near the Djinn chairs the actors in the film are seated in is one of Eero Saarinen's 1956 pedestal tables, another famous piece of "modern" design. The pedestal table would later make an appearance in another science fiction film, Men in Black.[102] Mourgue has been using the connection to 2001 in his advertising; a frame from the film's space station sequence and three production stills appear on the homepage of Mourgue's website.[104] Shortly before Kubrick's death, film critic Alexander Walker informed Kubrick of Mourgue's use of the film, joking to him "You're keeping the price up".[105] Commenting on their use in the film, Walker writes:Detailed instructions in relatively small print for various technological devices appear at several points in the film, the most notable of which is the lengthy instructions for the zero-gravity toilet on the Aries Moon shuttle. Similar detailed instructions for replacing the explosive bolts also appear on the hatches of the EVA pods, most visibly in closeup just before Bowman's pod leaves the ship to rescue Frank Poole.[108]The first director to use front projection with retroreflective matting in a mainstream movie, Kubrick chose the technique to produce the backdrops for the African scenes showing ape-men against vast natural-terrain backgrounds, as traditional techniques such as painted backdrops or rear-projection did not produce the realistic look Kubrick demanded. In addition to the "Dawn of Man" sequence, the front-projection system was used to depict astronauts walking on the lunar surface with the Moon base in the background.[109] The technique has been used widely in the film industry since 2001 pioneered its use, although starting in the 1990s it has been increasingly replaced by green screen systems.The front projection technique used by Kubrick consisted of a separate scenery projector set precisely at a right angle to the camera, and a half-silvered mirror placed at an angle in front of the camera that reflected the projected image forward, directly in line with the camera lens, onto a backdrop made of specially designed retroreflective material. The highly reflective and extremely directional screen behind the actors was capable of reflecting light from the projected image 100 times more efficiently than did the foreground subject. The lighting of the foreground subject then had to be balanced with that of the image from the screen, rendering the image from the scenery projector on the subject too faint to record. Kubrick noted that an exception was the eyes of the leopard in the "Dawn of Man" sequence, which glowed orange as a result of illumination by the scenery projector. He described this as "a happy accident".[110]Front projection had been used in smaller settings before 2001, mostly for still-photography or television production, using small still images and projectors. The expansive backdrops for the African scenes required a screen 40feet tall and 110feet wide, far larger than had ever been used before. When the reflective material was applied to the backdrop in 100-foot strips, however, they discovered variations at the seams of the strips led to obvious visual artifacts, a problem that was solved by tearing the material into smaller chunks and applying them in a random "camouflage" pattern on the backdrop. The existing projectors using 4 by 5inch transparencies resulted in grainy images when projected that large, so the 2001 team worked with MGM's Special Effects Supervisor, Tom Howard, to build a custom projector using 8 by 10inch transparencies, which required the largest water-cooled arc lamp available.[110]Other "in-camera" shots were scenes depicting spacecraft moving through space. The camera used to shoot the stationary model of the Discovery One spacecraft was driven along a track on a special mount, the motor of which was mechanically linked to the camera motormaking it possible to repeat camera moves and match speeds exactly. On the first pass, the model was unlit, masking the star-field behind it. The camera and film were returned to the start position, and on the second pass, the model was lit without the star field. For shots also showing the interior of the ship, a third pass was made with previously-filmed live-action scenes projected onto rear-projection screens in the model's windows. The result was a film negative image that was exceptionally sharper and clearer than a typical visual effects of the time.[111]For interior shots inside the spacecraft, ostensibly containing a giant centrifuge that produces artificial gravity, Kubrick had a 30-ton rotating "ferris wheel" built by Vickers-Armstrong Engineering Group at a cost of $750,000. The set was 38feet in diameter and 10feet wide.[112] Various scenes in the Discovery centrifuge were shot by securing set pieces within the wheel, then rotating it while the actor walked or ran in sync with its motion, keeping him at the bottom of the wheel as it turned. The camera could be fixed to the inside of the rotating wheel to show the actor walking completely "around" the set, or mounted in such a way that the wheel rotated independently of the stationary camera, as in the famous jogging scene where the camera appears to alternately precede and follow the running actor. The shots where the actors appear on opposite sides of the wheel required one of the actors to be strapped securely into place at the "top" of the wheel as it moved to allow the other actor to walk to the "bottom" of the wheel to join him. The most notable case is when Bowman enters the centrifuge from the central hub on a ladder, and joins Poole, who is eating on the other side of the centrifuge. This required Gary Lockwood to be strapped into a seat while Keir Dullea walked toward him from the opposite side of the wheel as it turned with him.[113]Another rotating set appeared in an earlier sequence on board the Aries trans-lunar shuttle. A stewardess is shown preparing in-flight meals, then carrying them into a circular walkway. Attached to the set as it rotates 180 degrees, the camera's point of view remains constant, and she appears to walk up the "side" of the circular walkway, and steps, now in an "upside-down" orientation, into a connecting hallway.[114]The realistic-looking effects of the astronauts floating weightless in space and inside the spacecraft were accomplished by suspending the actors from wires attached to the top of the set, with the camera underneath them pointing up. The actors' bodies blocked the camera's view of the suspension wires, creating a very believable appearance of floating. For the shot of Poole floating into the pod's arms during Bowman's rescue attempt, a stuntman replaced a dummy on the wire to realistically portray the movements of an unconscious human, and was shot in slow motion to enhance the illusion of drifting through space.[115] The scene showing Bowman entering the emergency airlock from the EVA pod was done in a similar way, with an off-camera stagehand, standing on a platform, holding the wire suspending Dullea above the camera positioned at the bottom of the vertically configured airlock. At the proper moment, the stagehand first loosened his grip on the wire, causing Dullea to fall toward the camera, then, while holding the wire firmly, he jumped off the platform, causing Dullea to ascend back up toward the hatch.[66]The colored lights in the Star Gate sequence were accomplished by slit-scan photography of thousands of high-contrast images on film, including op-art paintings, architectural drawings, moire patterns, printed circuits, and crystal structures. Known to staff as "Manhattan Project", the shots of various nebula-like phenomena, including the expanding star field, were colored paints and chemicals swirling in a pool-like device known as a cloud tank, shot in slow-motion in a dark room.[116] The live-action landscape shots in the 'Star Gate' sequence were filmed in the Hebridean islands, the mountains of northern Scotland, and Monument Valley (U.S.A.). The strange coloring and negative-image effects in these shots were achieved by the use of different color filters in the process of making dupe negatives.[117]An article by Douglas Trumbull about the creation of special effects for 2001 appears in the June 1968 issue of American Cinematographer.[118]Kubrick filmed several scenes that were deleted from the final film. These fall into two categories: scenes cut before any public screenings of the film, and scenes cut a few days after the world premiere on April 2, 1968.[119]The first ('pre-premiere') set of cuts includes a schoolroom on the Moon basea painting class that included Kubrick's daughters, additional scenes of life on the base, and Floyd buying a bush baby from a department store via videophone for his daughter. The most notable cut was a 10-minute black-and-white opening sequence featuring interviews with actual scientists, including Freeman Dyson,[120] discussing extraterrestrial life, which Kubrick removed after an early screening for MGM executives.[121] The actual text survives in the book The Making of Kubrick's 2001 by Jerome Agel.[122]The second ('post-premiere') set of cuts includes details about the daily life on Discovery, additional spacewalks, astronaut Bowman retrieving a spare part from an octagonal corridor, a number of cuts from the Poole murder sequence including the entire spacewalk preparation and shots of Hal turning off radio contact with Pooleexplaining Hal's response that the radio is "still dead" when Bowman asks him if radio contact has been madeand notably a close-up shot of Bowman picking up a slipper during his walk in the alien room; the slipper can still be seen behind him in what would have been the next shot in the sequence.[123]Kubrick's rationale for editing the film was to tighten the narrative; reviews suggested the film suffered too much by the radical departure from traditional cinema story telling conventions. Regarding the cuts, Kubrick stated, "I didn't believe that the trims made a critical difference. [...] The people who like it, like it no matter what its length, and the same holds true for the people who hate it".[121]As was typical of most movies of that era released both as a "road-show" (in Cinerama format in the case of Space Odyssey) and subsequently put into general release (in 70mm in the case of Odyssey), the entrance music, intermission music (and intermission altogether), and post-credits exit music were cut from most (though not all) prints of the latter version, although these have been restored to most DVD releases.[124][125]According to Kubrick biographer Jan Harlan, the director was adamant the trims were never to be seen, and that he "even burned the negatives"which he had kept in his garageshortly before his death. This is confirmed by former Kubrick assistant Leon Vitali: "I'll tell you right now, okay, on Clockwork Orange, The Shining, Barry Lyndon, some little parts of 2001, we had thousands of cans of negative outtakes and print, which we had stored in an area at his house where we worked out of, which he personally supervised the loading of it to a truck and then I went down to a big industrial waste lot and burned it. That's what he wanted."[126]In December, 2010, Douglas Trumbull announced that Warner Brothers had located 17 minutes of lost footage, "perfectly preserved", in a Kansas salt mine vault. A Warner Brothers press release asserts definitively that this material is from the post-premiere cuts, which Kubrick has stated totaled 19 minutes.[127][128]No immediate plans have been announced for the footage, but Trumbull intends to use stills from them in a book he is publishing.[129]Although special effects supervisor Douglas Trumbull had been unable to provide convincing footage of Saturn for 2001 (thus causing the filmmakers to change the mission's destination to Jupiter), he had solved the technical problems involved in reproducing Saturn's rings by the time he directed Silent Running four years later in 1972, employing effects developed but not completed for 2001.[130]In spite of Kubrick's tendency to destroy scenes he shot but did not use in the film, unused footage from the final Stargate sequence appears in the Beatles film Magical Mystery Tour during the sequence accompanied by their instrumental song "Flying".[131]Music plays a crucial part in 2001, and not only because of the relatively sparse dialogue. From very early on in production, Kubrick decided that he wanted the film to be a primarily non-verbal experience,[132] one that did not rely on the traditional techniques of narrative cinema, and in which music would play a vital role in evoking particular moods. About half the music in the film appears either before the first line of dialogue or after the final line. Almost no music is heard during any scenes with dialogue.The film is remarkable for its innovative use of classical music taken from existing commercial recordings. Most feature films then and now are typically accompanied by elaborate film scores or songs written especially for them by professional composers. In the early stages of production, Kubrick had actually commissioned a score for 2001 from noted Hollywood composer Alex North, who had written the score for Spartacus and also worked on Dr. Strangelove.[133] However, during post-production, Kubrick chose to abandon North's music in favor of the now-familiar classical music pieces he had earlier chosen as "guide pieces" for the soundtrack. North did not know of the abandonment of the score until after he saw the film's premiere screening.[134]2001 is particularly remembered for using pieces of Johann Strauss II's best-known waltz, An der schnen blauen Donau (On the Beautiful Blue Danube), during the extended space-station docking and lunar landing sequences, and the use of the opening from the Richard Strauss tone poem Also sprach Zarathustra[135] Gayane's Adagio from Aram Khatchaturian's Gayane ballet suite is heard during the sections that introduce Bowman and Poole aboard the Discovery conveying a somewhat lonely and mournful quality.In addition to the majestic yet fairly traditional compositions by the two Strausses and Aram Khatchaturian, Kubrick used four highly modernistic compositions by Gyrgy Ligeti which employ micropolyphony, the use of sustained dissonant chords that shift slowly over time. This technique was pioneered in Atmosphres, the only Ligeti piece heard in its entirety in the film. Ligeti admired Kubrick's film, but in addition to being irritated by Kubrick's failure to obtain permission directly from him, he was offended that his music was used in a film soundtrack shared by composers Johann and Richard Strauss.[136] Other music used is Ligeti's Lux Aeterna and an electronically altered form of his Aventures, the last of which was so used without Ligeti's permission and is not listed in the film's credits.[137]Hal's version of the popular song "Daisy Bell" (referred to by Hal as "Daisy" in the film) was inspired by a computer-synthesized arrangement by Max Mathews, which Arthur C. Clarke had heard in 1962 at the Bell Laboratories Murray Hill facility when he was, coincidentally, visiting friend and colleague John Pierce. At that time, a speech synthesis demonstration was being performed by physicist John Larry Kelly, Jr, by using an IBM 704 computer to synthesize speech. Kelly's voice recorder synthesizer vocoder recreated the song "Daisy Bell" ("Bicycle Built For Two"), with Max Mathews providing the musical accompaniment. Arthur C. Clarke was so impressed that he later used it in the screenplay and novel."[138]Many foreign language versions of the film do not use the song "Daisy." In the French soundtrack to 2001, Hal sings the French folk song "Au Clair de la Lune" while being disconnected.[139] In the German version, Hal sings the children's song "Hnschen klein" ("Johnny Little"),[140] and in the Italian version Hal sings "Giro giro tondo."[141]A recording of British light music composer Sidney Torch's "Off Beats Mood" was chosen by Kubrick as the theme for the fictitious BBC news programme "The World Tonight" seen aboard the spaceship Discovery.[142]On June 25, 2010 a version of the film specially remastered by Warner Bros without the music soundtrack opened the 350th anniversary celebrations of the Royal Society at Southbank Centre in co-operation with the British Film Institute, with the score played live by the Philharmonia Orchestra and Choir.[143]The initial MGM soundtrack album release contained none of the material from the altered and uncredited rendition of "Aventures", used a different recording of "Also sprach Zarathustra" than that heard in the film, and a longer excerpt of "Lux aeterna" than that in the film.In 1996, Turner Entertainment/Rhino Records released a new soundtrack on CD which included the material from "Aventures" and restored the version of "Zarathustra" used in the film, and used the shorter version of "Lux aeterna" from the film. As additional "bonus tracks" at the end, this CD includes the versions of "Zarathustra" and "Lux aeterna" on the old MGM soundtrack, an unaltered performance of "Aventures", and a nine-minute compilation of all of Hal's dialogue from the film.North's unused music had its first public appearance Telarc's issue of the main theme on Hollywood's Greatest Hits, Vol. 2, a compilation album by Erich Kunzel and the Cincinnati Pops Orchestra. All the music North originally wrote was recorded commercially by North's friend and colleague Jerry Goldsmith with the National Philharmonic Orchestra and was released on Varse Sarabande CDs shortly after Telarc's first theme release but before North's death. Eventually, a mono mix-down of North's original recordings, which had survived in the interim, would be released as a limited edition CD by Intrada Records.[144]The film's world premiere was on April 2, 1968, at the Uptown Theater in Washington, D.C. It opened two days later at the Warner Cinerama Theatre in Hollywood, and Loew's Capitol in New York. Kubrick then deleted 19 minutes of footage from the film before its general release in five other U.S. cities on April 10, 1968, and internationally in five cities the following day,[145][146] where it was shown in 70mm format, with a six-track stereo magnetic soundtrack, and projected in the 2.21:1 aspect ratio. The general release of the film in its 35mm anamorphic format took place in autumn 1968, with either a four-track magnetic stereo soundtrack or an optical monaural soundtrack.[147]The original 70mm release, like many Super Panavision 70 films of the era such as Grand Prix, was advertised as being in "Cinerama" in cinemas equipped with special projection optics and a deeply curved screen. In standard cinemas, the film was identified as a 70mm production. The original release of 2001: A Space Odyssey in 70mm Cinerama with six-track sound played continually for more than a year in several venues, and for 103 weeks in Los Angeles.[148]The film was re-released in 1974, 1977, and again in 1980.[149] Once 2001, the film's timeset, arrived, a restoration of the 70mm version was screened at the Ebert's Overlooked Film Festival, and the production was also reissued to selected movie houses in North America, Europe and Asia.[150][151]MGM/CBS Home Video released it on VHS and Beta home video for the first time in 1980.[152] MGM also published letterbox laserdisc editions (including an updated edition with Dolby Digital 5.1 sound), in 1991 and 1993. (Although Turner Entertainment had acquired the bulk of MGM's film library, the MGM company had a distribution deal with Turner.) There also was a special edition laserdisc from The Criterion Collection in the CAV format. In 1997, it was re-released in VHS, and as part of the "Stanley Kubrick Collection" in both VHS format (1999) and DVD (2000) with remastered sound and picture. In some video releases, three title cards were added to the three "blank screen" moments; "OVERTURE" at the beginning, "ENTR'ACTE" during the intermission, and "EXIT MUSIC" after the closing credits.[153]It has been released on Region 1 DVD four times: once by MGM Home Entertainment in 1998 and thrice by Warner Home Video in 1999, 2001, and 2007. The MGM release had a booklet, the film, trailer, and an interview with Arthur C. Clarke, and the soundtrack was remastered in 5.1 surround sound. The 1999 Warner Bros. release omitted the booklet, yet had a re-release trailer. The 2001 release contained the re-release trailer, the film in the original 2.21:1 aspect ratio, digitally re-mastered from the original 70mm print, and the soundtrack remixed in 5.1 surround sound. A limited edition DVD included a booklet, 70mm frame, and a new soundtrack CD of the film's actual (unreleased) music tracks, and a sampling of Hal's dialogue.Warner Home Video released a 2-DVD Special Edition on October 23, 2007 as part of their latest set of Kubrick reissues. The DVD was released on its own and as part of a revised Stanley Kubrick box set which contains new Special Edition versions of A Clockwork Orange, The Shining, Eyes Wide Shut, Full Metal Jacket, and the documentary A Life in Pictures. Additionally, the film was released in high definition on both HD DVD and Blu-ray Disc[154]Upon release, 2001 polarized critical opinion, receiving both ecstatic praise and vehement derision. Some critics viewed the original 161-minute cut shown at premieres in Washington D.C., New York, and Los Angeles,[1] while others saw the 19-minute-shorter general release version that was in theaters from April 10, 1968 onwards.[146]Positive
In The New Yorker, Penelope Gilliatt said it was "some kind of great film, and an unforgettable endeavor...The film is hypnotically entertaining, and it is funny without once being gaggy, but it is also rather harrowing."[155] Charles Champlin of the Los Angeles Times opined that it was "the picture that science fiction fans of every age and in every corner of the world have prayed (sometimes forlornly) that the industry might some day give them. It is an ultimate statement of the science fiction film, an awesome realization of the spatial future...it is a milestone, a landmark for a spacemark, in the art of film."[156] Louise Sweeney of The Christian Science Monitor felt that 2001 was "a brilliant intergalactic satire on modern technology. It's also a dazzling 160-minute tour on the Kubrick filmship through the universe out there beyond our earth."[157] Philip French wrote that the film was "perhaps the first multi-million-dollar supercolossal movie since D.W. Griffith's Intolerance fifty years ago which can be regarded as the work of one man...Space Odyssey is important as the high-water mark of science-fiction movie making, or at least of the genre's futuristic branch."[158] The Boston Globe's review indicated that it was "the world's most extraordinary film. Nothing like it has ever been shown in Boston before or, for that matter, anywhere...The film is as exciting as the discovery of a new dimension in life."[159] Roger Ebert gave the film four stars in his original review, believing the film "succeeds magnificently on a cosmic scale."[77] He later put it on his Top 10 list for Sight & Sound.[160] Time provided at least seven different mini-reviews of the film in various issues in 1968, each one slightly more positive than the preceding one; in the final review dated December 27, 1968, the magazine called 2001 "an epic film about the history and future of mankind, brilliantly directed by Stanley Kubrick. The special effects are mindblowing."[161]Negative
However, Pauline Kael said it was "a monumentally unimaginative movie,"[162] and Stanley Kauffmann of The New Republic called it "a film that is so dull, it even dulls our interest in the technical ingenuity for the sake of which Kubrick has allowed it to become dull."[163] Renata Adler of The New York Times wrote that it was "somewhere between hypnotic and immensely boring."[164] Variety's 'Robe' believed the film was a "Big, beautiful, but plodding sci-fi epic...A major achievement in cinematography and special effects, 2001 lacks dramatic appeal to a large degree and only conveys suspense after the halfway mark."[165] Andrew Sarris called it "one of the grimmest films I have ever seen in my life...2001 is a disaster because it is much too abstract to make its abstract points."[166] (Sarris reversed his opinion upon a second viewing of the film, and declared "2001 is indeed a major work by a major artist."[167]) John Simon felt it was "a regrettable failure, although not a total one. This film is fascinating when it concentrates on apes or machines...and dreadful when it deals with the in-betweens: humans...2001, for all its lively visual and mechanical spectacle, is a kind of space-Spartacus and, more pretentious still, a shaggy God story."[168] Eminent historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr. deemed the film "morally pretentious, intellectually obscure and inordinately long...a film out of control".[53] It has been noted that its slow pacing often alienates modern audiences more than it did upon its initial release.[169]Science fiction writers
Science fiction writers had a range of reactions to the film. Ray Bradbury was hostile, stating that the audience does not care when Poole dies. He praised the film's beautiful photography but disliked the banality of most of the dialogue.[170] Both he and Lester del Rey were put off by the film's feeling of sterility and blandness in all the human encounters amidst all the technological wonders, while both praised the pictorial element of the movie. Del Rey was especially harsh, describing the film as dull, confusing, and boring, predicting "It will probably be a box-office disaster, too, and thus set major science-fiction movie making back another ten years." However, the film was praised by science-fiction novelist Samuel R. Delany who was impressed by how the film undercuts the audience's normal sense of space and orientation in several ways. Like Bradbury, Delany picked up on the banality of the dialogue (in Delany's phrasing the characters are saying nothing meaningful), but Delany regards this as a dramatic strength, a prelude to the rebirth at the conclusion of the film.[171] Without analyzing the film in detail, Isaac Asimov spoke well of Space Odyssey in his autobiography, and other essays. The film won the Hugo Award for best dramatic presentation, an award heavily voted on by published science-fiction writers.[172]The film earned $8.5 million in theatrical gross rental from roadshow engagements throughout 1968,[149] contributing to North American rentals of $15 million during its original release.[173] Reissues have brought its cumulative exhibition gross to $56.9 million in North America,[174] and over $190 million worldwide.[173]George Lucas, 1977[148]The influence of 2001 on subsequent filmmakers is considerable. Steven Spielberg, George Lucas and others, including many special effects technicians, discuss the impact the film has had on them in a featurette entitled Standing on the Shoulders of Kubrick: The Legacy of 2001 included in the 2007 DVD release of the film. Spielberg calls it his film generation's "big bang", while Lucas says it was "hugely inspirational", labeling Kubrick as "the filmmaker's filmmaker". Sydney Pollack refers to it as "groundbreaking", and William Friedkin states 2001 is "the grandfather of all such films". At the 2007 Venice film festival, director Ridley Scott stated he believed 2001 was the unbeatable film that in a sense killed the science fiction genre.[175] Similarly, film critic Michel Ciment in his essay "Odyssey of Stanley Kubrick" stated "Kubrick has conceived a film which in one stroke has made the whole science fiction cinema obsolete."[176] Others, however, credit 2001 with opening up a market for films such as Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Alien, Blade Runner, and Contact; proving that big-budget "serious" science-fiction films can be commercially successful, and establishing the "sci-fi blockbuster" as a Hollywood staple.[177] Science magazine Discover's blogger Stephen Cass, discussing the considerable impact of the film on subsequent science-fiction, writes that "the balletic spacecraft scenes set to sweeping classical music, the tarantula-soft tones of HAL 9000, and the ultimate alien artifact, the Monolith, have all become enduring cultural icons in their own right."[178] Video game director Hideo Kojima has also cited 2001: A Space Odyssey as one of the chief influences for his Metal Gear series, with Solid Snake and Otacon inspired by Dave and Hal.[179]One commentator has suggested that the image of the Star Child and Earth has contributed to the rise of the "whole earth" icon as a symbol of the unity of humanity. Writing in The Asia Pacific Journal Robert Jacobs traces the history of this icon from early cartoons and drawings of the earth to photos of the earth from early space missions, to its historic appearance on the cover of The Whole Earth Catalog. Noting that images of the entire earth recur several times in A Space Odyssey, Jacobs writesIn August 2011, in response to Apple Inc.'s patent infringement lawsuit against Samsung, the latter argued that Apple's iPad was effectively modeled on the visual tablets that appear aboard spaceship Discovery in the Space Odyssey film, which legally constitute "prior art". Legally, prior art is information that has been disclosed to the public in any form about an invention before a given date that might be relevant to the patent's claim of originality.[181] Samsung appealed specifically to a clip appearing on YouTube arguingAttached hereto as Exhibit D is a true and correct copy of a still image taken from Stanley Kubrick's 1968 film "2001: A Space Odyssey." In a clip from that film lasting about one minute, two astronauts are eating and at the same time using personal tablet computers. As with the design claimed by the D'889 Patent, the tablet disclosed in the clip has an overall rectangular shape with a dominant display screen, narrow borders, a predominately flat front surface, a flat back surface (which is evident because the tablets are lying flat on the table's surface), and a thin form factor.[182]"Siri", Apple's natural language voice control system for the iPhone, features three references to the film; a modem that looks like Hal's faceplate, if asked to sing it might reply "Daisy, Daisy, give me your answer do", and it responds "I'm sorry I can't do that" when asked to "open the pod bay doors".[183][184]Inspired by Clarke's visual tablet device, in 1994 a European Commission-funded R&D project code named "NewsPAD" developed and pilot tested a portable 'multimedia viewer' aiming for the realisation of an electronic multimedia 'newspaper' pointing the way to a future fully interactive and highly personalised information source. Involved partners were Acorn RISC Technologies UK, Archimedes GR, Carat FR, Ediciones Primera Plana ES, Instut Catala de Tecnologia ES, and TechMAPP UK.[185]2001 earned Stanley Kubrick an Academy Award for Best Visual Effects and various Oscar nominations. Anthony Masters was nominated for Best Art Direction; there were also nominations for Best Director (Kubrick), and Original Screenplay (Kubrick, Clarke). An honorary award was made to John Chambers in that year for his makeup work on Planet of the Apes, and Clarke reports that he "wondered, as loudly as possible, whether the judges had passed over 2001 because they thought we had used real ape-men..."[186]2001 was No. 15 on AFI's 2007 100 Years... 100 Movies, was named No. 40 on its 100 Years, 100 Thrills, was included on its 100 Years, 100 Quotes ("Open the pod bay doors, Hal."), and Hal 9000 is the No. 13 villain in the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains.[194] 2001 is the only science fiction film to make the Sight & Sound poll for ten best movies, and tops the Online Film Critics Society list of "greatest science fiction films of all time."[195] In 1991, this film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.[196] Other lists that include the film are 50 Films to See Before You Die (#6), The Village Voice 100 Best Films of the 20th century (#11), the Sight & Sound Top Ten poll (#6),[197] and Roger Ebert's Top Ten (1968) (#2). In 1995, the Vatican named it as one of the 45 best films ever made (and included it in a sub-list of the "Top Ten Art Movies" of all time.)[198]In 2011, the film was the third most screened film in secondary schools in the United Kingdom.[199]Since its premiere, 2001: A Space Odyssey has been analyzed and interpreted by professional movie critics, amateur writers and science fiction fans, virtually all of whom have noted its deliberate ambiguity. Questions about 2001 range from uncertainty about its deeper philosophical implications about humanity's origins and final destiny in the universe,[200] to interpreting elements of the film's more enigmatic scenes such as the meaning of the monolith, or the final fate of astronaut David Bowman. There are also simpler and more mundane questions about what drives the plot, in particular the causes of Hal's breakdown[201] (explained in earlier drafts but kept mysterious in the film).Stanley Kubrick encouraged people to explore their own interpretations of the film, and refused to offer an explanation of "what really happened" in the movie, preferring instead to let audiences embrace their own ideas and theories. In a 1968 interview with Playboy magazine, Kubrick stated:In a subsequent discussion of the film with Joseph Gelmis, Kubrick said his main aim was to avoid "intellectual verbalization" and reach "the viewer's subconscious". However, he said he did not deliberately strive for ambiguity- it was simply an inevitable outcome of making the film nonverbal, though he acknowledged this ambiguity was an invaluable asset to the film. He was willing then to give a fairly straightforward explanation of the plot on what he called the "simplest level", but unwilling to discuss the metaphysical interpretation of the film which he felt should be left up to the individual viewer.[202]For some readers, Arthur C. Clarke's more straightforward novelization of the script is key to interpreting the film. Clarke's novel explicitly identifies the monolith as a tool created by an alien race that has been through many stages of evolution, moving from organic form to biomechanical, and finally achieving a state of pure energy. These aliens travel the cosmos assisting lesser species to take evolutionary steps. Conversely, film critic Penelope Houston noted in 1971 that because the novel differs in many key respects from the film, it perhaps should not be regarded as the skeleton key to unlock it.[203]Multiple allegorical interpretations of 2001 have been proposed, including seeing it as a commentary on Friedrich Nietzsche's philosophical tract Thus Spoke Zarathustra, or as an allegory of human conception, birth and death.[204] This latter can be seen through the final moments of the film, which are defined by the image of the "star child", an in utero fetus that draws on the work of Lennart Nilsson.[205] The star child signifies a "great new beginning",[205] and is depicted naked and ungirded, but with its eyes wide open.[206] Leonard F. Wheat sees Space Odyssey as a multi-layered allegory, commenting simultaneously on Nietzsche, Homer, and the relationship of man to machine.The reasons for Hal's malfunction and subsequent malignant behavior have also elicited much discussion. He has been compared to Frankenstein's monster. In Clarke's novel, Hal malfunctions because of being ordered to lie to the crew of Discovery. Film critic Roger Ebert has noted that Hal as the supposedly perfect computer, actually behaves in the most human fashion of all of the characters.[207]Rolling Stone reviewer Bob McClay sees the film as like a four-movement symphony, its story told with "deliberate realism".[208] Carolyn Geduld believes that what "structurally unites all four episodes of the film" is the monolith, the film's largest and most unresolvable enigma.[209] Vincent LoBrutto's biography of Kubrick notes that for many, Clarke's novel is the key to understanding the monolith.[210] Similarly, Geduld observes that "the monolith ...has a very simple explanation in Clarke's novel", though she later asserts that even the novel doesn't fully explain the ending.McClay's Rolling Stone review notes a parallelism between the monolith's first appearance in which tool usage is imparted to the apes (thus 'beginning' mankind) and the completion of "another evolution" in the fourth and final encounter[211] with the monolith. In a similar vein, Tim Dirks ends his synopsis saying "The cyclical evolution from ape to man to spaceman to angel-starchild-superman is complete".[212]The first and second encounters of humanity with the monolith have visual elements in common; both apes, and later astronauts, touch the monolith gingerly with their hands, and both sequences conclude with near-identical images of the sun appearing directly over the monolith (the first with a crescent Moon adjacent to it in the sky, the second with a near-identical crescent Earth in the same position), both echoing the Sun-Earth-Moon alignment seen at the very beginning of the film.[213] The second encounter also suggests the triggering of the monolith's radio signal to Jupiter by the presence of humans,[214] echoing the premise of Clarke's source story The Sentinel.The monolith is the subject of the film's final line of dialogue (spoken at the end of the "Jupiter Mission" segment): "Its origin and purpose still a total mystery". Reviewers McClay and Roger Ebert have noted that the monolith is the main element of mystery in the film, Ebert writing of "The shock of the monolith's straight edges and square corners among the weathered rocks", and describing the apes warily circling it as prefiguring man reaching "for the stars".[215] Patrick Webster suggests the final line relates to how the film should be approached as a whole, noting "The line appends not merely to the discovery of the monolith on the Moon, but to our understanding of the film in the light of the ultimate questions it raises about the mystery of the universe."[216]The film conveys what some viewers have described as a sense of the sublime and numinous. Roger Ebert notes:In a book on architecture, Gregory Caicco writes that Space Odyssey illustrates how our quest for space is motivated by two contradictory desires, a "desire for the sublime" characterized by a need to encounter something totally other than ourselves  "something numinous"  and the conflicting desire for a beauty that makes us feel no longer "lost in space", but at home.[218] Similarly, an article in The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy, titled "Sense of Wonder", describes how 2001 creates a "numinous sense of wonder" by portraying a universe that inspires a sense of awe, which at the same time we feel we can understand.[219] Christopher Palmer has noted that there exists in the film a coexistence of "the sublime and the banal", as the film implies that to get into space, mankind had to suspend the "sense of wonder" that motivated him to explore space to begin with.[220]Kubrick did not envisage a sequel to 2001. Fearing the later exploitation and recycling of his material in other productions (as was done with the props from MGM's Forbidden Planet), he ordered all sets, props, miniatures, production blueprints, and prints of unused scenes destroyed. Most of these materials were lost, with some exceptions: a 2001 spacesuit backpack appeared in the "Close Up" episode of the Gerry Anderson series UFO,[37][48][221][222][223] and one of Hal's eyepieces is in the possession of the author of Hal's Legacy, David G. Stork. In 2012 Lockheed engineer Adam Johnson, working with Frederick I. Ordway III, science adviser to Stanley Kubrick, wrote the book "2001: The Lost Science" which for the first time featured many of the blueprints of the spacecraft and movie sets that had previously been thought destroyed.Clarke went on to write three sequel novels: 2010: Odyssey Two (1982), 2061: Odyssey Three (1987), and 3001: The Final Odyssey (1997). The only filmed sequel, 2010, was based on Clarke's 1982 novel and was released in 1984. Kubrick was not involved in the production of this film, which was directed by Peter Hyams in a straightforward style with more dialogue. Clarke saw it as a fitting adaptation of his novel,[224] and had a brief cameo appearance in the film. As Kubrick had ordered all models and blueprints from 2001 destroyed, Hyams was forced to recreate these models from scratch for 2010. Hyams also claimed that he would not make the film had he not received both Kubrick's and Clarke's blessings:The other two novels have not been adapted for the screen, although actor Tom Hanks has expressed interest in possible adaptations of 2061 and 3001.[226]In 2012, two screenplay adaptations of both 2061 and 3001 were both posted on the 2001:Exhibit website, in the hopes of generating interest in both MGM and WB to adapt the last two novels into films.[227]Beginning in 1976, Marvel Comics published both a comic adaptation of the film written and drawn by Jack Kirby, and a Kirby-created 10-issue monthly series expanding on the ideas of the film and novel.In 2002, the French film maker William Karel (after initially planning a straight documentary on Stanley Kubrick) directed a hoax mockumentary about Kubrick and the NASA moonlanding titled Dark Side of the Moon. He had the cooperation of Kubrick's surviving family and some NASA personnel (all of whom appear using scripted lines) and using recycled footage of members of the Nixon administration taken out of context. The film purported to demonstrate that the NASA moon landings had been faked and that the moonlanding footage had been directed by Stanley Kubrick during the production of 2001: A Space Odyssey. In discussing the film, director Karel saidWhen the film was shown to a group of undergraduate sociology students taking a course on conspiracy theories, many of them mistakenly believed that this was an earnest and serious film.[229] Furthermore, moon-landing hoax advocate Wayne Green cited the film as evidence for his views apparently believing the excerpts of interviews with Henry Kissinger, Alexander Haig, etc. (taken out of context in the film) were really talking about a moonlanding hoax.[230] Nonetheless, the second half of the film contains several giveaways that the entire film is a hoax in jest, including a film producer named "Jack Torrance" (the name of Jack Nicholson's character in Kubrick's The Shining) an aging NASA astronaut named "David Bowman" (the astronaut in 2001) and increasing use of footage that does not match or support the narration. Australian broadcaster SBS television aired the film on April 1 as an April fools' joke, and again on November 17, 2008 as part of Kubrick week.A 1995 article promoting a similar mock hoax about Kubrick faking the Apollo landing also deceived many readers (in the sense of their believing the author was a bona fide conspiracy theorist). The article was posted originally on the Usenet humor news group 'alt.humor.best-of-usenet', but later reproduced in other venues not devoted to humor. The original article (with correct attribution) can be read at "www.clavius.org", a website devoted to debunking moon landing hoax theories.[231] Websites which have reproduced it as an earnest advocacy effort include the website of the flat earth society.[232] Conspiracy theorist Clyde Lewis lifted several passages from the mock article verbatim (without attribution) in support of his moonlanding hoax theories.[233] Lewis and the flat earth society seem to ignore closing passages of the article stating the final Apollo scenes were actually filmed in the Sea of Tranquillity (an area on the moon's surface) to which Kubrick did not go personally due to his chronic fear of flying, passages meant to give away that the article is a tongue-in-cheek mock hoax.An entirely sincere documentary film making the same claim that Morel's "mockumentary" did in jest was released in 2011 by occultist and conspiracy theorist Jay Weidner entitled Kubrick's Odyssey: Secrets Hidden in the Films of Stanley Kubrick; Part One: Kubrick and Apollo. The film was self-released on DVD by Weidner's company "Sacred Mysteries". Weidner claims that Kubrick used the same front-projection sequences used in the Dawn of Man sequence and the lunar landing sequence in Space Odyssey to simulate the Apollo landing and the NASA footage of the astronauts on the surface of the moon. Weidner also claims Kubrick's film The Shining contains coded messages about Kubrick's involvement in faking the moon-landing. The science magazine Discovery reviewed an earlier article by Weidner upon which the film was based as "bunk" but "oddly compelling" and "strangely fascinating".[234] This theory is again discussed in the 2012 documentary Room 237.In actual front screen projection it is impossible to do wide camera pans and zooms of the kind that are frequently seen in Apollo moon footage, and are notably absent from the relatively static camera movement in the Dawn of Man sequence in Space Odyssey. The Dawn of Man sequence contains anomalies such as the glowing eyes of the cheetah which give away the existence of front-screen projection. Nothing comparable is seen in the visors of the astronauts in Apollo moon footage.2001 has been the frequent subject of both parody and homage, sometimes extensively and other times briefly, employing both its distinctive music and iconic imagery.April 2, 1968(1968-04-02) (Premiere)April 4, 1968(1968-04-04) (Theatrical)1 Plot

1.1 The Dawn of Man
1.2 TMA-1
1.3 Jupiter Mission
1.4 Jupiter and Beyond the Infinite

1.1 The Dawn of Man1.2 TMA-11.3 Jupiter Mission1.4 Jupiter and Beyond the Infinite2 Cast3 Development

3.1 Writing

3.1.1 Kubrick and Clarke meet
3.1.2 Search for source material
3.1.3 Parallel development of film and novelization
3.1.4 Depiction of alien life
3.1.5 Stages of script and novel development
3.1.6 Remnants of early drafts in final film

3.1.6.1 Hal's breakdown
3.1.6.2 Military nature of orbiting satellites


3.1.7 Dialogue


3.2 Speculation on sources

3.1 Writing

3.1.1 Kubrick and Clarke meet
3.1.2 Search for source material
3.1.3 Parallel development of film and novelization
3.1.4 Depiction of alien life
3.1.5 Stages of script and novel development
3.1.6 Remnants of early drafts in final film

3.1.6.1 Hal's breakdown
3.1.6.2 Military nature of orbiting satellites


3.1.7 Dialogue

3.1.1 Kubrick and Clarke meet3.1.2 Search for source material3.1.3 Parallel development of film and novelization3.1.4 Depiction of alien life3.1.5 Stages of script and novel development3.1.6 Remnants of early drafts in final film

3.1.6.1 Hal's breakdown
3.1.6.2 Military nature of orbiting satellites

3.1.6.1 Hal's breakdown3.1.6.2 Military nature of orbiting satellites3.1.7 Dialogue3.2 Speculation on sources4 Production

4.1 Filming
4.2 Set design and furnishings
4.3 Special effects
4.4 Deleted scenes

4.4.1 Reuse of special effects shots



4.1 Filming4.2 Set design and furnishings4.3 Special effects4.4 Deleted scenes

4.4.1 Reuse of special effects shots

4.4.1 Reuse of special effects shots5 Soundtrack

5.1 Music
5.2 Soundtrack album

5.1 Music5.2 Soundtrack album6 Release

6.1 Theatrical run
6.2 Home video

6.1 Theatrical run6.2 Home video7 Reception

7.1 Critical reaction
7.2 Box-office

7.1 Critical reaction7.2 Box-office8 Influence

8.1 Influence on film
8.2 Influence on culture
8.3 Influence on technology and law

8.1 Influence on film8.2 Influence on culture8.3 Influence on technology and law9 Awards and honors

9.1 Academy Awards
9.2 Other awards
9.3 Top film lists

9.1 Academy Awards9.2 Other awards9.3 Top film lists10 Interpretation11 Sequels and adaptations12 Mock hoaxes and conspiracy theory13 Parodies and homages14 See also15 Notes16 References17 External links1.1 The Dawn of Man1.2 TMA-11.3 Jupiter Mission1.4 Jupiter and Beyond the Infinite3.1 Writing

3.1.1 Kubrick and Clarke meet
3.1.2 Search for source material
3.1.3 Parallel development of film and novelization
3.1.4 Depiction of alien life
3.1.5 Stages of script and novel development
3.1.6 Remnants of early drafts in final film

3.1.6.1 Hal's breakdown
3.1.6.2 Military nature of orbiting satellites


3.1.7 Dialogue

3.1.1 Kubrick and Clarke meet3.1.2 Search for source material3.1.3 Parallel development of film and novelization3.1.4 Depiction of alien life3.1.5 Stages of script and novel development3.1.6 Remnants of early drafts in final film

3.1.6.1 Hal's breakdown
3.1.6.2 Military nature of orbiting satellites

3.1.6.1 Hal's breakdown3.1.6.2 Military nature of orbiting satellites3.1.7 Dialogue3.2 Speculation on sources3.1.1 Kubrick and Clarke meet3.1.2 Search for source material3.1.3 Parallel development of film and novelization3.1.4 Depiction of alien life3.1.5 Stages of script and novel development3.1.6 Remnants of early drafts in final film

3.1.6.1 Hal's breakdown
3.1.6.2 Military nature of orbiting satellites

3.1.6.1 Hal's breakdown3.1.6.2 Military nature of orbiting satellites3.1.7 Dialogue3.1.6.1 Hal's breakdown3.1.6.2 Military nature of orbiting satellites4.1 Filming4.2 Set design and furnishings4.3 Special effects4.4 Deleted scenes

4.4.1 Reuse of special effects shots

4.4.1 Reuse of special effects shots4.4.1 Reuse of special effects shots5.1 Music5.2 Soundtrack album6.1 Theatrical run6.2 Home video7.1 Critical reaction7.2 Box-office8.1 Influence on film8.2 Influence on culture8.3 Influence on technology and law9.1 Academy Awards9.2 Other awards9.3 Top film listsKeir Dullea as Dr. David BowmanGary Lockwood as Dr. Frank PooleWilliam Sylvester as Dr. Heywood R. FloydDouglas Rain as the voice of the HAL 9000Daniel Richter as the chief man-ape ("Moon-Watcher" in Clarke's novel)Richter, a professional street mime, in addition to playing the lead ape was also responsible for choreographing the movements of the other man-apes, who were mostly portrayed by his standing mime troupe.[19]Leonard Rossiter as Dr. Andrei SmyslovMargaret Tyzack as ElenaRobert Beatty as Dr. Ralph HalvorsenFrank Miller as mission controllerEdward Bishop as lunar shuttle captainEdwina Carroll as Aries stewardessPenny Brahms as stewardessHeather Downham as stewardessAlan Gifford as Poole's fatherAnn Gillis as Poole's motherVivian Kubrick (uncredited) as Floyd's daughterKenneth Kendall (uncredited) as the BBC announcerBAFTA Awards:[187]

Best Art Direction (Anthony Masters, Harry Lange and Ernest Archer)
Best Cinematography (Geoffrey Unsworth)
Best Road Show
Best Sound Track (Winston Ryder)

Best Art Direction (Anthony Masters, Harry Lange and Ernest Archer)Best Cinematography (Geoffrey Unsworth)Best Road ShowBest Sound Track (Winston Ryder)Cinema Writers Circle, Spain:[188]

Best Foreign Film

Best Foreign FilmDavid di Donatello Awards, Italy:[189]

Best Foreign Production (Stanley Kubrick)

Best Foreign Production (Stanley Kubrick)Hugo Awards:[172]

Best Dramatic Presentation

Best Dramatic PresentationKansas City Film Critics:[190]

Best Director (Stanley Kubrick)
Best Picture

Best Director (Stanley Kubrick)Best PictureLaurel Awards:[191]

Best Road Show

Best Road ShowNational Board of Review

Listed among the year's Top Ten Films[192]

Listed among the year's Top Ten Films[192]BAFTA Awards:[187]

Best Film (Stanley Kubrick)
UN Award (Stanley Kubrick)

Best Film (Stanley Kubrick)UN Award (Stanley Kubrick)Directors Guild of America (DGA):[193]

Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures (Stanley Kubrick)

Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures (Stanley Kubrick)Laurel Awards:[191]

Best Director

Best DirectorThought to be the first time Kubrick gave permission for his work to be re-used, Apple Inc.'s 1999 website advertisement "It was a bug, Dave" was made using footage from the film. Launched during the era of concerns over Y2K bugs, the ad implied that Hal's weird behavior was caused by a Y2K bug, before driving home the point that "only Macintosh was designed to function perfectly".[235]Mad magazine #125 (March 1969) featured a spoof called 201 Minutes of a Space Idiocy written by Dick DeBartolo and illustrated by Mort Drucker.[236] In the final panels it is revealed that the monolith is a movie script titled "How to Make an Incomprehensible Science Fiction Movie" by Stanley Kubrick." It was reprinted in various special issues, in the MAD About the Sixties book, and partially in the book "The Making of Kubrick's 2001".[237]Mel Brooks' satirical film History of the World, Part I opens with a parody of Kubrick's "Dawn of Man" sequence, narrated by Orson Welles. DVDVerdict describes this parody as "spot on".[238] (Ironically, Brooks had earlier defeated 2001: A Space Odyssey in competition for the Best Screenplay Oscar.) A similar spoof of the "Dawn of Man" sequence also opened Ken Shapiro's 1974 comedy The Groove Tube in which the monolith was replaced by a television set. (The film is mostly a parody of television. Film and Filming[239] held that after this wonderful opening, the film slid downhill.)Woody Allen cast actor Douglas Rain (Hal in Kubrick's film) in an uncredited part as the voice of the controlling computer in the closing sequences of his science-fiction comedy Sleeper.[240]Kubrick was both a great fan of The Simpsons[241] and in friendly contact with the show's producers, according to his stepdaughter Katharina. Analysts of the show argue that The Simpsons contains more references to many films of Stanley Kubrick than any other pop culture phenomenon.[242][243] Gary Westfahl has noted that while references to "fantastic fiction" in The Simpsons are copious, "there are two masters of the genre whose impact on The Simpsons supersedes that of all others: Stanley Kubrick and Edgar Allan Poe."[244] John Alberti has referred to "the show's almost obsessive references to the films of Stanley Kubrick."[245] Simpson's creator Matt Groening is also the creator of Futurama which also has copious references to various Kubrick films.
Of the many references to Kubrick in Groening's work, perhaps the most notable Space Odyssey reference in The Simpsons is in the episode "Deep Space Homer" in which Bart throws a felt-tip marker into the air; in slow motion it rotates, before a match cut replaces it with a cylindrical satellite. In 2004 Empire magazine listed this as the third best film parody of the entire run of the show.[246] In the Futurama episode "Love and Rocket" a sentient spaceship revolts in a manner similar to Hal. Total Film listed this as number 17 in its list of 20 Funniest Futurama parodies, while noting that Futurama has referenced Space Odyssey on several other occasions.[247]Peter Sellers starred in Hal Ashby's comedy-drama Being There about a simple-minded middle-aged gardener who has lived his entire life in the townhouse of his wealthy employer. In the scene where he first leaves the house and ventures into the wide world for the first time, the soundtrack plays a jazzy version of Strauss' Thus Spake Zarathustra arranged by Eumir Deodato. Film critic James A. Davidson writing for the film journal Images suggests "When Chance emerges from his home into the world, Ashby suggests his child-like nature by using Richard Strauss' Thus Spake Zarathustra as ironic background music, linking his hero with Kubrick's star baby in his masterpiece 2001: A Space Odyssey."[248]Tim Burton's Charlie and the Chocolate Factory has a scene (using actual footage from A Space Odyssey) in which the monolith morphs into a chocolate bar.[249] Catholic News noted that the film "had subtle and obvious riffs on everything from the saccharine Disney "Small World" exhibit to Munchkinland to, most brilliantly, a hilarious takeoff on Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey."[250]Andrew Stanton, the director of WALL-E, revealed in an interview with WIRED magazine that his film was in many ways an homage to Space Odyssey, Alien, Blade Runner, Close Encounters and several other science-fiction films.[251] The reviewer for USA Today noted the resemblance of the spaceship's computer, Auto, to Hal.[252] The same year saw the release of the much less successful film Eagle Eye, about which The Charlotte Observer noted that, like 2001, it featured a "red-eyed, calm-voiced supercomputer that took human life to protect what it felt were higher objectives"[253]Commenting on the broader use of Ligeti's music beyond that by Kubrick, London Magazine in 2006 noted Monty Python's use of Ligeti in a 60-second spoof of Space Odyssey in the Flying Circus episode commonly labeled "A Book at Bedtime".[254]The poorly reviewed Canadian spoof 2001: A Space Travesty has been occasionally alluded to as a full parody of Kubrick's film,[255] both because of its title and star Leslie Nielsen's many previous films which were full parodies of other films.[256] However, Space Travesty only makes occasional references to Kubrick's material, its "celebrities are really aliens" jokes resembling those in Men in Black.[257] Canadian reviewer Jim Slotek noted "It's not really a spoof of 2001, or anything in particular. There's a brief homage at the start, and one scene in a shuttle en route to the Moon that uses The Blue Danube...The rest is a patched together plot."[258] Among many complaints about the film, reviewer Berge Garabedian derided the lack of much substantive connection to the Kubrick film (the latter of which he said was "funnier").[259]Among spoof references to several science-fiction films and shows,[260] Airplane II features a computer called ROK 9000 in control of a Moon shuttle which malfunctions and kills crew members, which several reviewers found reminiscent of Hal.[261][262][263]John Landis incorporates references to a fictional film entitled See You Next Wednesday into most of his films, the title of which was inspired by the last line spoken by Frank Poole's father during Poole's videophone conversation with his parents in Space Odyssey.2001: A Space Odyssey has also been referenced in multiple video games, usually either with reference to either the monolith or Hal. In SimEarth and Spore, monoliths are used to encourage the evolution of species.[264][265]In Metal Gear Solid, the character Hal Emmerich was named in-world by his father after HAL 9000.[266][267]List of films about outer spaceList of spacecraft from the Space Odyssey seriesNASA Advanced Space Transportation ProgramToynbee tiles, mysterious notices in U.S. cities mentioning "Kubrick's 2001"List of films considered the bestAgel, Jerome (1970). The Making of Kubrick's 2001. Signet. ISBN0-451-07139-5.Bizony, Piers (2001). 2001 Filming the Future. London: Sidgwick and Jackson. ISBN1-85410-706-2.Castle, Alison (ed.), ed. (2005). "Part 2: The Creative Process / 2001: A Space Odyssey". The Stanley Kubrick Archives. New York: Taschen. ISBN3-8228-2284-1.Chion, Michel (2001). Kubrick's Cinema Odyssey. translated by Claudia Gorbman. London: British Film Institute. ISBN0-85170-840-4.Ciment, Michel (1980, 1999). Kubrick. New York: Faber and Faber. ISBN0-571-21108-9.Clarke, Arthur C. (1972). The Lost Worlds of 2001. London: Sidgwick and Jackson. ISBN0-283-97903-8.Fiell, Charlotte (2005). 1,000 Chairs (Taschen 25). Taschen. ISBN978-3-8228-4103-7.Gelmis, Joseph (1970). The Film Director As Superstar. New York: Doubleday & Company.Hughes, David (2000). The Complete Kubrick. London: Virgin Publishing Ltd.. ISBN0-7535-0452-9.Johnson, Adam (2012). 2001 The Lost Science. Burlington Canada: Apogee Prime. ISBN978-1-9268-3719-2.Kolker, Robert (ed.), ed. (2006). Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey: New Essays. Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN0-19-517453-4.Pina, Leslie A. (2002). Herman Miller Office. Pennsylvania, USA: Schiffer Publishing. ISBN978-0-7643-1650-0.Richter, Daniel (2002). Moonwatcher's Memoir: A Diary of 2001: A Space Odyssey. foreword by Arthur C. Clarke. New York: Carroll & Graf Publishers. ISBN0-7867-1073-X.Schwam, Stephanie (ed.), ed. (2000). The Making of 2001: A Space Odyssey. introduction by Jay Cocks. New York: Modern Library. ISBN0-375-75528-4.Shuldiner, Herbert (1968) How They Filmed '2001: A Space Odyssey', Bonnier Corporation: Popular Science, June 1968, pg. 6267, Vol. 192, No. 6, ISSN 0161-7370Walker, Alexander (2000). Stanley Kubrick, Director. New York: W.W. Norton and Company. ISBN0-393-32119-3.Wheat, Leonard F. (2000). Kubrick's 2001: A Triple Allegory. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. ISBN0-8108-3796-X.2001: A Space Odyssey at the Internet Movie Database2001: A Space Odyssey at Rotten Tomatoes2001: A Space Odyssey Internet Resource ArchiveKubrick 2001: The Space Odyssey ExplainedThe 2001: A Space Odyssey Collectibles ExhibitRoger Ebert's Essay on 2001The Alt.Movies.Kubrick FAQ many observations on the meaning of 2001The Kubrick Site including many works on 2001The Maltese Falcon (1941) is a Warner Bros. film noir based on the novel of the same name by Dashiell Hammett.[2][3] Directed by John Huston, the film stars Humphrey Bogart as private investigator Sam Spade and Mary Astor as his "femme fatale" client. Gladys George, Peter Lorre, and Sydney Greenstreet co-star, with Greenstreet appearing in his film debut. The Maltese Falcon was Huston's directorial debut and was nominated for three Academy Awards.The story follows a San Francisco private detective and his dealings with three unscrupulous adventurers, all of whom are competing to obtain a jewel-encrusted falcon statuette.The Maltese Falcon has been named as one of the greatest films of all time by Roger Ebert[4] and Entertainment Weekly,[5] and was cited by Panorama du Film Noir Amricain as the first major film noir.[6]The film premiered on October 3, 1941 in New York City, and was selected for inclusion in the Library of Congress' National Film Registry in 1989.[7]In 1539 the Knight Templars of Malta, paid tribute to Charles V of Spain, by sending him a Golden Falcon encrusted from beak to claw with rarest jewelsbut pirates seized the galley carrying this priceless token and the fate of the Maltese Falcon remains a mystery to this day[8]Introductory text appearing after the film's opening creditsIn 1941 San Francisco, private investigators Sam Spade (Humphrey Bogart) and Miles Archer (Jerome Cowan) meet prospective client Miss Ruth Wonderly (Mary Astor). She claims to be looking for her missing sister, who is involved with a man named Floyd Thursby. Wonderly is to meet Thursby. After receiving a substantial retainer, Archer volunteers to follow her that night and help get her sister back.That night, Spade is informed that Archer has been killed. He meets his friend, Police Detective Tom Polhaus (Ward Bond), at the murder scene. He then calls Wonderly's hotel, but she has checked out. He is grilled by Polhaus and his supervisor, Lieutenant Dundy (Barton MacLane), who inform him that Thursby was also murdered that same evening. Dundy suggests that Spade had the opportunity and motive to kill Thursby, who likely killed Archer. Archer's widow (Gladys George), with whom Spade had had an affair, believes that Spade shot his partner so he could have her.Later that morning, Spade meets Wonderly, now calling herself Brigid O'Shaughnessy. She explains that Thursby was her partner and probably killed Archer, but claims to have no idea who killed Thursby. Spade agrees to investigate the murders.At his office, Spade meets Joel Cairo (Peter Lorre), who first offers him a $5,000 fee to find a "black figure of a bird," then pulls a gun on him in order to search for it. Spade manages to knock Cairo out and go through his belongings. When Cairo revives, he hires Spade. Later that evening, Spade tells O'Shaughnessy about Cairo. When Cairo shows up, it becomes clear that Spade's acquaintances know each other. Cairo becomes agitated when O'Shaughnessy reveals that the "Fat Man" is in San Francisco.In the morning, Spade goes to Cairo's hotel, where he spots Wilmer (Elisha Cook, Jr.), a young man who had been following him earlier. He gives Wilmer a message for his boss, Kasper Gutman (Sydney Greenstreet), the "Fat Man". Spade meets Gutman. Gutman begins to talk about the Falcon, but becomes evasive, causing Spade to storm out. Later, Wilmer takes Spade at gunpoint to see Gutman. Spade overpowers Wilmer, but meets with Gutman anyway. Gutman relates the history of the Maltese Falcon. He offers Spade $25,000 for the bird and a quarter of the proceeds from its sale. Then Spade passes out; his drink was spiked. Wilmer, Gutman and Cairo (who had been in the other room) depart.When Spade awakens, he searches the suite and finds a newspaper with the arrival time of the freighter La Paloma circled. He goes to the dock, only to find the ship on fire, so he returns to his office. A man (Walter Huston) clutching a bundle wrapped in newspaper bursts in and staggers toward Spade before dying. The contents of his wallet identify the dead man as Captain Jacobi of the La Paloma. The bundle contains the Maltese Falcon.The phone rings. O'Shaughnessy gives an address and then screams before the line goes dead. Spade stashes the package in a bus terminal baggage room, then goes to the address. It turns out to be an empty lot. Spade returns home and finds O'Shaughnessy hiding in a doorway. He takes her inside, and finds Gutman, Cairo, and Wilmer waiting for him, guns drawn. Gutman gives Spade $10,000 for the Falcon, but Spade tells them that part of his price is someone he can turn over to the police for the murders of Archer, Thursby, and Captain Jacobi. Spade suggests Wilmer as the best choice, since he certainly killed Thursby and Jacobi. After some intense negotiation, Gutman and Cairo agree; Wilmer is knocked out in a scuffle. Spade gets the details of what happened and who killed whom, so that he can present a convincing story to the police along with Wilmer.Just after dawn, Spade calls his secretary, Effie Perrine (Lee Patrick), to bring him the bundle. However, when Gutman inspects the black statuette, he discovers that it is a fake. He suggests that he and Cairo return to Istanbul to continue their quest. After they leave, Spade calls the police and tells them where to pick up the pair. Spade then angrily confronts O'Shaughnessy, telling her he knows she killed Archer to implicate Thursby, her unwanted accomplice. O'Shaughnessy cannot believe that Spade would turn her over to the police, but he does, despite his feelings for her.Though Hammett himself worked for a time as a private detective for the Pinkerton Detective Agency in San Francisco (and used his birth name "Samuel" for the story's main protagonist), Hammett called Spade "a dream man" with "no original" - the author wrote of the character in 1934:Spade has no original. He is a dream man in the sense that he is what most of the private detectives I worked with would like to have been, and, in their cockier moments, thought they approached.[9]Hammett reportedly drew upon his years as a detective in creating many of the other characters for The Maltese Falcon, which reworks elements from two of his stories published in Black Mask magazine in 1925, "The Whosis Kid" and "The Gutting of Couffignal".[10] The novel itself was serialized in five parts in Black Mask in 192930 before being published in book form in 1930 by Alfred A. Knopf.The 1941 film is the third film version of the novel. The first version (1931) starred Ricardo Cortez as Sam Spade and Bebe Daniels as Brigid O'Shaughnessy. The second, titled Satan Met a Lady (1936), starred Warren William and Bette Davis. It was rewritten as a light comedy, with many elements of the story changed.[11][12]Warner Bros. had been prevented by the Hays Office censors from re-releasing the 1931 version due to its "lewd" content; it was not until after 1966 that unedited copies of the 1931 film could be shown in the U.S. Though largely compliant with the Production Code, Huston's remake did contain some innuendo: when the police implicate Spade in his partner's murder, Spade asks Det. Polhaus, "What's your boyfriend gettin' at Tom?".Reportedly, Humphrey Bogart was not the first choice to play Sam Spade. Producer Hal Wallis initially offered the role to George Raft, who rejected it because he did not want to work with an inexperienced director[citation needed], choosing instead to make Manpower, opposite Edward G. Robinson and Marlene Dietrich, with director Raoul Walsh. Raft had earlier turned down the lead role in Walsh's High Sierra[citation needed], the film that effectively launched Bogart's career as leading man rather than chronic supporting player, and is believed by many[who?] to have passed up the role of "Rick"[citation needed], the cynical hero of Casablanca. The 42-year-old Bogart was delighted[citation needed] to play a highly ambiguous character who is both honorable and greedy. Huston was particularly grateful[citation needed] that Bogart had quickly accepted the role, and the film helped to consolidate their lifelong friendship and set the stage for later collaboration on such films as The Treasure of the Sierra Madre (1948), Key Largo (1948), and The African Queen (1951). Bogart's convincing interpretation became the archetype for a private detective in the film noir genre, providing him near-instant acclaim and rounding and solidifying his onscreen persona. It was The Maltese Falcon that Ingrid Bergman watched over and over again while preparing for Casablanca, in order to learn how to interact and act with Bogart.[13]The role of the deceitful femme fatale Brigid O'Shaughnessy was originally offered to Geraldine Fitzgerald[citation needed], but went to Mary Astor when Fitzgerald decided to appear in a stage play. Hammett remembers that the character "had two originals, one an artist, the other a woman who came to Pinkerton's San Francisco office to hire an operative to discharge her housekeeper, but neither of these women was a criminal."[9]The character of the sinister "Fat Man" Kasper Gutman was based on A. Maundy Gregory, an overweight British detective-turned-entrepreneur who was involved in many sophisticated endeavors and capers, including a search for a long-lost treasure not unlike the jeweled Falcon.[13] However, the character was not easily cast, and it took some time before producer Hal Wallis solved the problem by suggesting that Huston give a screen test to Sydney Greenstreet, a veteran stage character actor who had never appeared on film before. Greenstreet, who was then 61 years old and weighed between 280 and 350 pounds, impressed Huston with his sheer size, distinctive abrasive laugh, bulbous eyes, and manner of speaking.[13] Greenstreet went on to be typecast in later films of the 1940s such as Casablanca (1942), The Mask of Dimitrios (1944), The Verdict (1946), and Three Strangers (1946).Greenstreet's characterization had such a strong cultural impact that the "Fat Man" atomic bomb dropped on Nagasaki during World War II was named after him.[14] The appellation "Fat Man" for Gutman was created for the film; in the novel, although he is a fat man, he is referred to as "G".The character of Joel Cairo was based on a criminal Hammett arrested for forgery in Pasco, Washington, in 1920.[9] In Hammett's novel, the character is clearly homosexual, but to avoid problems with the censors, this was downplayed considerably, although he is still noticeably effeminate. For instance, Cairo's calling cards and handkerchiefs are scented with gardenias; he fusses about his clothes and becomes hysterical when blood from a scratch ruins his shirt; and he makes subtle fellating gestures with his cane during his interview with Spade. By contrast, in the novel, Cairo is referred to as "queer" and "the fairy". The film is one of many of the era that, because of the Hays Office, could only hint at homosexuality. It is mentioned by The Celluloid Closet, a documentary about how films dealt with homosexuality.Elisha Cook Jr., a well-known character actor, was cast by Huston as Wilmer. Like Cairo (and even Gutman), the character of Wilmer has also been seen by many commentators as homosexual, primarily because of the use of "gunsel", meaning a young homosexual in a relationship with an older man, to describe him.[15][16][17]Gladys George had made her mark on Broadway with her starring role in Lawrence Riley's Personal Appearance (1934) (adapted for the screen in 1936 as Go West, Young Man); this comedy's huge success had been credited in great part to her comic performance.[18] Her role as Archer's wife thus displays her versatility.John Hamilton appeared in a minor role as District Attorney Bryan. Ten years later he would portray Perry White in The Adventures of Superman on television.The unbilled appearance of the character actor Walter Huston, in a small cameo role as the freighter captain who delivers the Falcon, was done as a good luck gesture for his son, John Huston, on his directorial debut. The elder Huston had to promise Jack Warner that he would not demand a dime for his little role before he was allowed to stagger into Spade's office[citation needed].During his preparation for The Maltese Falcon, first-time director John Huston planned each second of the film to the very last detail, tailoring the screenplay with instructions to himself for a shot-for-shot setup, with sketches for every scene, so filming could proceed fluently and professionally.[19] Huston was adamant that the film keep to schedule, and that everything be methodically planned to the fullest to ensure that the film never went over budget. By providing the cast with a highly detailed script, Huston was able to let them rehearse their scenes with very little intervention.[citation needed]Such was the extent and efficacy of his preparation of the script that almost no line of dialog was eliminated in the final edit of the film.[20] Except for some exterior night shots, Huston shot the entire film in sequence,[21] which greatly helped his actors. The shooting went so smoothly that there was actually extra time for the cast to enjoy themselves; Huston brought Bogart, Astor, Bond, Lorre and others to the Lakeside Golf Club near the Warner lot to relax in the pool, dine, drink and talk until midnight about anything other than the film they were working on.Huston used much of the dialog from the original novel. The only major section of the novel which wasn't used at all in the film is the story of a man named "Flitcraft",[22] which Spade tells to Brigid while waiting in his apartment for Cairo to show up. Huston removed all references to sex that the Hays Office had deemed to be unacceptable. Huston was also warned not to show excessive drinking. The director fought the latter, on the grounds that Spade was a man who put away a half bottle of hard liquor a day and showing him completely abstaining from alcohol would mean seriously falsifying his character.[13]With its low-key lighting and inventive and arresting angles, the work of Director of Photography Arthur Edeson is one of the film's great assets.[citation needed] Unusual camera anglessometimes low to the ground, revealing the ceilings of rooms (a technique also used by Orson Welles and his cinematograher Gregg Toland on Citizen Kane)are utilized to emphasize the nature of the characters and their actions. Some of the most technically striking scenes involve Gutman, especially the scene where he explains the history of the Falcon to Spade, purposely drawing out his story so that the knockout drops he has slipped into Spade's drink will take effect.[13] Meta Wilde, Huston's longtime script supervisor, remarked of this scene:It was an incredible camera setup. We rehearsed two days. The camera followed Greenstreet and Bogart from one room into another, then down a long hallway and finally into a living room; there the camera moved up and down in what is referred to as a boom-up and boom-down shot, then panned from left to right and back to Bogart's drunken face; the next pan shot was to Greenstreet's massive stomach from Bogart's point of view.... One miss and we had to begin all over again.[23]Film critic Roger Ebert says of this scene:Was the shot just a stunt? Not at all; most viewers don't notice it because they're swept along by its flow. And consider another shot, where Greenstreet chatters about the falcon while waiting for a drugged drink to knock out Bogart. Huston's strategy is crafty. Earlier, Greenstreet has set it up by making a point: "I distrust a man who says 'when.' If he's got to be careful not to drink too much, it's because he's not to be trusted when he does." Now he offers Bogart a drink, but Bogart doesn't sip from it. Greenstreet talks on, and tops up Bogart's glass. He still doesn't drink. Greenstreet watches him narrowly. They discuss the value of the missing black bird. Finally, Bogart drinks, and passes out. The timing is everything; Huston doesn't give us closeups of the glass to underline the possibility that it's drugged. He depends on the situation to generate the suspicion in our minds. (This was, by the way, Greenstreet's first scene in the films.)[4]Very nearly as visually evocative are the scenes involving Astor, almost all of which suggest prison: In one scene she wears striped pajamas, the furniture in the room is striped, and the slivers of light coming through the Venetian blinds suggest cell bars, as do the bars on the elevator cage at the end of the film when she takes her slow ride downward with the police, apparently on her way to prison and eventually execution. Huston and Edeson crafted each scene to make sure the images, action and dialog blended effectively, sometimes shooting closeups of characters with other cast members acting with them off camera.[13]The "Maltese Falcon" itself is said to have been based on the "Kniphausen Hawk",[24] a ceremonial pouring vessel made in 1697 for George William von Kniphausen, Count of the Holy Roman Empire. It is modeled after a hawk perched on a rock and is encrusted with red garnets, amethysts, emeralds and blue sapphires. The vessel is currently owned by the Duke and Duchess of Devonshire[25] and is an integral piece of the Chatsworth House collection.[24]Several 11.5-inch (29cm) tall falcon props were made for use in the film because Humphrey Bogart dropped the original during shooting.[26] The original is on display to this day in Warner Brothers' film museum, its tail feathers visibly dented from Bogart's accident. Two 47-pound (21kg) lead falcons and one 4 pound, 5.4 ounce (2kg) resin version are known to exist.[26] One lead falcon has been displayed for years at various venues. The second, which was marred at the end of the film by Sydney Greenstreet, was given to William Conrad by studio chief Jack L. Warner. It was auctioned off in December 1994, nine months after Conrad's death, for $398,500 to Ronald Winston of Harry Winston, Inc.[27] At that time, it was the highest price paid for a film prop[citation needed]. It was used to model a 10-pound gold replica displayed at the 69th Academy Awards. The lead and resin falcons are valued in excess of $2 million[citation needed]. Adam Savage, co-host of Mythbusters, has gone to great lengths to create an accurate replica.[28]The Maltese Falcon is considered a classic example of a MacGuffin, a plot device that motivates the characters of the story but otherwise has little relevance.[29]The revolver used to shoot Miles is correctly identified by Spade as a Webley-Fosbery. The revolver was available in an eight-shot .38 calibre version and a six-shot .455 calibre version. In the film, the .455 version was incorrectly described as the eight-shot weapon.[citation needed]Bogart (as Spade) does not wear a trench coat in this film, although he does wear an unbelted wool overcoat in outdoor scenes. The popular association of the trench coat with Bogart began when he wore one as Rick Blaine in Casablanca, and as Philip Marlowe in The Big Sleep.[citation needed]Following a September 1941 preview, Variety called it "one of the best examples of actionful and suspenseful melodramatic story telling in cinematic form":[30]"Unfolding a most intriguing and entertaining murder mystery, picture displays outstanding excellence in writing, direction, acting and editingcombining in overall as a prize package of entertainment for widest audience appeal. Due for hefty grosses in all runs, it's textured with ingredients presaging numerous holdovers in the keysand strong word-of-mouth will make the b.o. wickets spin."Upon its release, Bosley Crowther called it "the best mystery thriller of the year", saying "young Mr. Huston gives promise of becoming one of the smartest directors in the field"; according to Crowther, "the trick which Mr. Huston has pulled is a combination of American ruggedness with the suavity of the English crime schoola blend of mind and muscleplus a slight touch of pathos."[31]The film received three nominations at the 14th Academy Awards: Best Picture, Sydney Greenstreet for Best Supporting Actor, and John Huston for Best Adapted Screenplay.As a result of the film's success, Warner Brothers immediately made plans to produce a sequel entitled The Further Adventures of the Maltese Falcon, which Huston was to direct in early 1942. However, due to Huston's high demand as a director and unavailability of the major cast members, the sequel was never made.[13]The film has been named as one of the greatest films of all time by Roger Ebert[4] and Entertainment Weekly.[5]In 1989, The Maltese Falcon was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant", going in the first year of voting.[7]American Film Institute recognitionThe DVD was re-released on June 1, 2006, with a new Dolby Digital mono soundtrack. It includes the original theatrical trailer. The DVD also includes an essay, A History of the Mystery, examining the mystery and film noir genres through the decades.Also included on a second and third disc are two previous film versions of the Hammett novel: The Maltese Falcon (1931) and Satan Met a Lady. In a new documentary, The Maltese Falcon: One Magnificent Bird, a blooper reel, makeup tests and three radio show adaptations  two featuring the film's original stars  are also present.Another special feature is a Turner Classic Movies documentary, Becoming Attractions: The Trailers of Humphrey Bogart. Hosted by TCM's Robert Osborne, the 45-minute feature traces Bogart's evolution from a heavy in the 1930s to a romantic leading man in the 1940s, and his return to playing bad men late in that decade.The film was colorized for VHS home video,[citation needed] but that version is no longer available. CBS/Fox Video released a 101-minute black and white version of the film on laserdisc in 1982.The music for The Maltese Falcon was written by Adolph Deutsch, who later went on to win an Academy Award for his incidental music for Oklahoma! in 1955.The recording was re-released in 2002 with the soundtracks to other film works of Deutsch, including George Washington Slept Here, The Mask of Dimitrios, High Sierra, and Northern Pursuit.The CBS radio network created a 30-minute adaptation of The Maltese Falcon on The Screen Guild Theater with actors Bogart, Astor, Greenstreet and Lorre all reprising their roles. This radio segment was originally released on September 20, 1943, and was played again on July 3, 1946.[32] On May 18, 1950, another adaptation was broadcast on The Screen Guild Theater starring Bogart and his wife Lauren Bacall. In addition, there was an adaptation on Lux Radio Theater on February 8, 1943, starring Edward G. Robinson, Gail Patrick, and Laird Cregar.In 1975, Columbia released a spoof sequel of The Maltese Falcon called The Black Bird, starring George Segal as Sam Spade, Jr., with Patrick and Cook reprising their roles as Effie and Wilmer from the 1941 version. In 1974, during production for this film, one of the seven plaster figurines of the original 1941 Falcon on display at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art was stolen, and it was alleged that the "disappearance" of the figurine was staged as a publicity stunt for the Segal film. If it was, it came up short since news accounts of the missing Falcon exceeded those of the Segal film.[33]In 1988, the film was homaged in "The Big Goodbye", a first-season episode of Star Trek: The Next Generation. Captain Jean-Luc Picard, played by Patrick Stewart, is a fan of detective stories of the early 20th century, including the fictional Dixon Hill, a stand-in for Sam Spade. In a holodeck simulation, Picard-as-Hill is opposed by Cyrus Redblock, whose name is a play on "Sydney Greenstreet". Redblock is looking for "the item", which is never identified, standing in for the Falcon.The film was parodied in the first-season episode of Sylvester & Tweety Mysteries entitled "The Maltese Canary" in which Tweety is mistaken for the rare statue and chased after by various shady characters, including Sylvester.In 2001, the film was paid homage again in "Charmed Noir", a seventh-season episode of Charmed. In it, two siblings at Magic School write an immersive novel in which all characters are seeking the "Burmese Falcon". The boys become inadvertently trapped in the novel for decades, though time basically stands still for them. Paige Matthews, played by Rose McGowan, and an associate become trapped in the book as well many years after the boys do. Matthews asks one of the boys if the Burmese Falcon is "Like the Maltese Falcon?" in an attempt to understand the situation in which she finds herself. The boy replies that everyone knows that the Maltese Falcon was a fake, and that the Burmese Falcon is the genuine article.[34]Streaming audioOctober 3, 1941(1941-10-03)1 Plot2 Cast3 Background4 Production

4.1 Casting
4.2 Preparation
4.3 Cinematography
4.4 Props and costumes

4.4.1 Falcon
4.4.2 Others



4.1 Casting4.2 Preparation4.3 Cinematography4.4 Props and costumes

4.4.1 Falcon
4.4.2 Others

4.4.1 Falcon4.4.2 Others5 Reception6 Home media7 Soundtrack8 Adaptations and parodies9 References10 External links4.1 Casting4.2 Preparation4.3 Cinematography4.4 Props and costumes

4.4.1 Falcon
4.4.2 Others

4.4.1 Falcon4.4.2 Others4.4.1 Falcon4.4.2 OthersHumphrey Bogart as Sam SpadeMary Astor as Brigid O'ShaughnessyGladys George as Iva ArcherPeter Lorre as Joel CairoBarton MacLane as Lt. of Detectives DundyLee Patrick as Effie PerrineSydney Greenstreet as Kasper GutmanWard Bond as Detective Tom PolhausJerome Cowan as Miles ArcherElisha Cook, Jr. as Wilmer CookJames Burke as LukeMurray Alper as Frank RichmanJohn Hamilton as BryanWalter Huston as Captain Jacobi (uncredited)1998  AFI's 100 Years100 Movies  No. 232001  AFI's 100 Years100 Thrills  No. 262003  AFI's 100 Years100 Heroes and Villains:

Kasper Gutman  Nominated Villain
Brigid O'Shaughnessy  Nominated Villain

Kasper Gutman  Nominated VillainBrigid O'Shaughnessy  Nominated Villain2005  AFI's 100 Years100 Movie Quotes:

"The stuff that dreams are made of."  No. 14
"You're good, you're very good."  Nominated

"The stuff that dreams are made of."  No. 14"You're good, you're very good."  Nominated2007  AFI's 100 Years100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  No. 312008  AFI's 10 Top 10  No. 6 Mystery FilmKasper Gutman  Nominated VillainBrigid O'Shaughnessy  Nominated Villain"The stuff that dreams are made of."  No. 14"You're good, you're very good."  NominatedThe Maltese Falcon at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Maltese Falcon at Rotten TomatoesBooks about The Maltese Falcon from film.virtual-history.comThe Maltese Falcon on Lux Radio Theater: February 8, 1943The Maltese Falcon on Screen Guild Theater: September 20, 1943Raging Bull is a 1980 American biographical sports drama art film directed by Martin Scorsese, and adapted by Paul Schrader and Mardik Martin from Jake LaMotta's memoir Raging Bull: My Story. It stars Robert De Niro as Jake LaMotta, an Italian American middleweight boxer whose sadomasochistic rage, sexual jealousy, and animalistic appetite destroyed his relationship with his wife and family. Also featured in the film are Joe Pesci as Joey, La Motta's well-intentioned brother and manager who tries to help Jake battle his inner demons; and Cathy Moriarty as his abused wife. The film features supporting roles from Nicholas Colasanto, Theresa Saldana, and Frank Vincent.Scorsese was initially reluctant to develop the project, though he eventually came to relate to La Motta's story. Schrader re-wrote Martin's first screenplay, and Scorsese and De Niro together made uncredited contributions thereafter. Pesci was an unknown actor prior to the film, as was Moriarty, who was suggested for her role by Pesci. During principal photography, each of the boxing scenes was choreographed for a specific visual style and De Niro gained approximately 60 pounds (27kg) to portray La Motta in his later post-boxing years. Scorsese was exacting in the process of editing and mixing the film, expecting it to be his last major feature.After receiving mixed initial reviews (and criticism due to its violent content), it went on to garner a high critical reputation and now to a very large extent is regarded among the greatest films ever made, including by Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times, renowned British motion picture historian Leslie Halliwell, the American Film Institute, Time magazine, The New York Times, Variety, Entertainment Weekly, Empire magazine, Total Film, Film 4, and BFI's Sight and Sound. It was listed in the National Film Registry in 1990, its first year of eligibility.In 1964, an aging, overweight Italian American Jake LaMotta (Robert De Niro) practices a comedy routine. A flashback to 1941 shows his first loss in a major boxing match, against Jimmy Reeves. Jake's brother Joey LaMotta (Joe Pesci) later discusses a potential shot for the middleweight title with one of his Mafia connections, Salvy Batts (Frank Vincent). Some time thereafter, Jake spots a 15-year-old girl named Vickie (Cathy Moriarty) at an open-air swimming pool in his Bronx neighborhood. He eventually pursues a relationship with her, even though he is already married. Jake defeats Sugar Ray Robinson once in 1943 and has another win three weeks later. Despite the fact that Jake dominated Robinson during the bout, the judges surprisingly rule in favor of Robinson and Joey feels he won only because he was enlisting into the US Army the following week. Jake is married to Vickie by 1947.As Jake's fears grow about Vickie having feelings for other men, particularly Tony Janiro, the opponent for his forthcoming fight, he shows off his sexual jealousy when he defeats Janiro in front of the local Mob boss, Tommy Como (Nicholas Colasanto) and Vickie. As Joey discusses the victory with journalists at the Copacabana, he is distracted by seeing Vickie approach a table with Salvy and his crew. Joey speaks with Vickie, who says she is giving up on his brother. Blaming Salvy, Joey viciously attacks him in a fight that spills outside of the club. Como later orders them to apologize, and has Joey tell Jake that if he wants a chance at the championship title, which he has control over, he will have to take a dive first. In a match against Billy Fox, Jake does not even bother to put up a fight. He is suspended shortly thereafter from the board on suspicion of throwing the fight, though he realizes the error of his judgment when it is too late. Despite the suspension, he eventually wins the middleweight championship title against Marcel Cerdan in 1949.A year later, Jake asks Joey if he fought with Salvy at the Copacabana because of Vickie. Jake then asks if Joey had an affair with her; Joey refuses to answer, insults Jake, and decides to leave. Jake directly asks Vickie about the affair and she sarcastically states that she had sex with the entire neighborhood (including his brother, Salvy, and Tommy Como) after he breaks down the bathroom door where she briefly hides from him. Jake angrily walks to Joey's house and brutally beats him up in front of Vickie and Joey's wife and children. After defending his championship belt in a brutal fifteen round bout against Laurent Dauthuille in 1950,[1] he makes a call to his brother after the fight, but when Joey assumes Salvy is on the other end and starts insulting and cursing at him, Jake says nothing and hangs up. Estranged from Joey, Jake's career begins to decline slowly and he eventually loses his title to Sugar Ray Robinson in their final encounter in 1951.[2]By 1956, Jake and his family have moved to Miami. After staying out all night at his new nightclub there, Vickie tells him she wants a divorce (which she has been planning since his retirement). He is later arrested for introducing under-age girls (posing as 21-year-olds) to men and serves a jail sentence in 1957 after failing to raise enough bribe money by taking the jewels out of his championship belt instead of selling the belt itself. In his jail cell, Jake pounds the walls, sorrowfully questioning his misfortune and crying in despair. Upon returning to New York City in 1958, he happens upon his estranged brother Joey, who forgives him but is elusive. Going back to the beginning sequence, Jake refers to the "I coulda been a contender" scene from the 1954 movie On the Waterfront starring Marlon Brando complaining that his brother should have been there for him but is also keen enough to give himself some slack. After a stage hand informs him that the auditorium where he is about to perform is crowded, Jake starts to chant "I'm the boss" while shadowboxing.The film ends with a Biblical quote. This quote was a reference to Martin Scorsese's film professor, Haig Manoogian to whom the film is dedicated as he died just before it was released. Scorsese credits Manoogian with helping him "to see".Raging Bull came about when De Niro read the autobiography upon which the film is based on the set of The Godfather Part II. Although disappointed by the book's writing style, he became fascinated by the character of Jake LaMotta. He showed the book to Martin Scorsese on the set of Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore in the hope that he would consider the project.[4] Scorsese repeatedly turned down the opportunity to sit in the director's chair, claiming he had no idea what Raging Bull was about, even though he had read some of the text. Never a sports fan, when he found out what LaMotta used to do for a living, he said, 'A boxer? I don't like boxing...Even as a kid, I always thought that boxing was boring... It was something I couldn't, wouldn't grasp.' His overall opinion of sport in general is, 'Anything with a ball, no good.' [5] The book was then passed onto Mardik Martin, the film's eventual co-screenwriter, who said "the trouble is the damn thing has been done a hundred times before  a fighter who has trouble with his brother and his wife and the mob is after him". The book was even shown to producer Irwin Winkler by De Niro, who was willing to assist only if Scorsese agreed.[6] After nearly dying from a drug overdose, Scorsese agreed to make the film for De Niro's sake, not only to save his own life but also to save what remained of his career. Scorsese knew that he could relate to the story of Jake LaMotta as a way to redeem himself; he saw the role being portrayed as an everyman for whom "the ring becomes an allegory of life," making the project a very personal one for him.[7][8][9][10]Preparation for the film began with Scorsese shooting some 8mm color footage featuring De Niro boxing in a ring. One night when the footage was being shown to De Niro, Michael Chapman, and his friend and mentor, the English director Michael Powell, Powell pointed out that the color of the gloves at the time would have only been maroon, oxblood, or even black. Scorsese decided to use this as one of the reasons to film Raging Bull in black and white. Other reasons would be to distinguish the film from other color films around the time and to acknowledge the problem of fading color film stock - an issue Scorsese recognized.[11][12][13] Scorsese even went to two matches at Madison Square Garden to aid his research, picking up on minor but essential details such as the blood sponge and latterly, the blood on the ropes (which would later be used in the film).[13]Under the guidance of Winkler, Mardik Martin was asked to start writing the screenplay.[14] According to De Niro, under no circumstances would United Artists accept Mardik Martin's script.[15] The story was based on the vision of journalist Peter Hamill of a 1930s and 1940s style, when boxing was known as "the great dark prince of sports". De Niro was unimpressed when he finished reading the first draft, however.[16] Taxi Driver screenwriter Paul Schrader was swiftly brought in to re-write the script around August 1978.[16] Some of the changes that Schrader made to the script saw a re-write of the scene with the uncooked steak and inclusion of LaMotta seen masturbating in a Florida cell. The character of LaMotta's brother, Joey, was finally added, previously absent from Martin's script.[15][16] United Artists saw a massive improvement on the quality of the script. However, its chief executives, Steven Bach and David Field, met up with Scorsese, De Niro, and producer Irwin Winkler in November 1978 to say they were worried that the content would be X-rated material and have no chance of finding an audience.[11]According to Scorsese, the script was left to him and De Niro, and they spent two and a half weeks on the island of Saint Martin, extensively re-building the content of the film.[10] The most significant change would be the entire scene when LaMotta fixes his television and then accuses his wife of having an affair. Other changes included the removal of Jake and Joey's father; the reduction of organized crime's role in the story and a major re-write of LaMotta's fight with Tony Janiro.[17][18] They were even responsible for the end sequence where LaMotta is all alone in his dressing room quoting the "I could have been a contender" scene from On the Waterfront.[18] An extract of Richard III had been pondered but Michael Powell thought it would be a bad decision within the context of a film that was American.[10] According to Steven Bach, the first two screenwriters (Mardik Martin and Paul Schrader) would receive credit but since there was no payment to the writer's guild on the script, De Niro and Scorsese's work would remain uncredited.[18]One of Scorsese's trademarks was casting many actors and actresses new to the profession, and this film was no exception.[19] De Niro, who was already committed to play Jake LaMotta, began to help Scorsese track down unfamiliar names to play his on-screen brother, Joey, and wife, Vickie.[20][21] The role of Joey LaMotta was the first to be cast. De Niro was watching a low budget television film called The Death Collector when he saw the part of a young career criminal played by Joe Pesci (then an unknown and struggling actor) as an ideal candidate. Prior to receiving a call from De Niro and Scorsese for the proposal to star in the film, Pesci had not worked in film for four years and was running an Italian restaurant in New Jersey. Pesci initially claimed that it would have to be a good role for him to consider it, and he later accepted the part.The role of Vickie, Jake's second wife, would have interest across the board, but Pesci who suggested the actress, Cathy Moriarty, from a picture he once saw at a New Jersey disco.[21] Both De Niro and Scorsese believed that Moriarty could portray the role after meeting with her on several occasions and noticing her husky voice and physical maturity. The duo had to prove to the Screen Actors Guild that she was right for the role when Cis Corman showed 10 comparing pictures of both Moriarty and the real Vickie LaMotta for proof she had a resemblance.[21] Moriarty was then asked to take a screen test which she managedpartly aided with some improvised lines from De Niro  after some confusion wondering why the crew were filming her take. Joe Pesci also persuaded his former show-biz pal and co-star in The Death Collector, Frank Vincent to try for the role of Salvy Batts. Following a successful audition and screen test, Vincent received the call to say he had received the part.[22] Charles Scorsese, the director's father, made his film debut as Tommy Como's cousin, Charlie.[22]While in the midst of practicing a Bronx accent and preparing for his role, De Niro met both LaMotta and his ex-wife, Vikki on separate occasions. Vikki, who lived in Florida, would tell stories about her life with her former husband and also show old home movies (that would later inspire a similar sequence to be done for the film).[12][23] Jake LaMotta, on the other hand, would serve as his trainer accompanied by Al Silvani as coach at the Gramercy club in New York getting him into shape. The actor found that boxing came naturally to him; he entered as a middleweight boxer, winning two of his three fights in a Brooklyn ring dubbed "young LaMotta" by the commentator. According to Jake LaMotta, he felt that De Niro was one of his top 20 best middleweight boxers of all time.[12][21]According to production mixer, Michael Evje, the film began shooting at the Los Angeles Olympic Auditorium on April 16, 1979. Grips hung huge curtains of black duvetyne on all four sides of the ring area to contain the artificial smoke used extensively for visual effect. On May 7, the production moved to the Culver City Studio, Stage 3, and filmed there until the middle of June. Scorsese made it clear during filming that he did not appreciate the traditional way in films to show fights from the spectators' view.[13] He insisted that one camera operated by the Director of Photography, Michael Chapman would be placed inside the ring as he would play the role of an opponent keeping out of the way of other fighters so that we could see the emotions of the fighters, including those of Jake.[21] The precise moves of the boxers would be done as dance routines from the information of a book about dance instructors in the mode of Arthur Murray. A punching bag which sat in the middle of the ring was used by De Niro between takes before aggressively coming straight on to do the next scene.[21][24] The initial five-week schedule for the shooting of the boxing scenes took longer than expected, putting Scorsese under pressure.[21]According to Scorsese, production of the film was then closed down for around four months with the entire crew being paid, so De Niro could go on a binge eating trip around Northern Italy and France.[12][24] When he did come back to the United States, his weight increased from 145 to 215pounds (66 to 97kg).[21] The scenes with the heftier Jake LaMotta  which include announcing his retirement from boxing and LaMotta ending up in a Florida cell  were completed while approaching Christmas 1979 within seven to eight weeks so as not to aggravate the health issues which were already affecting De Niro's posture, breathing, and talking.[21][24][25]According to production sound mixer, Michael Evje, Jake's nightclub sequence was filmed in a closed-down San Pedro club on December 3. The jail cell head-banging scene was shot on a constructed set with De Niro asking for minimal crew to be present - there wasn't even a boom operator.The final sequence where Jake LaMotta is sitting in front of his mirror was filmed on the last day of shooting taking 19 takes, with only the thirteenth one being used for the film. Scorsese wanted to have an atmosphere that would be so cold that the words would have an impact as he tries to come to terms with his relationship with his brother.[10]The editing of Raging Bull began when production was temporarily put on hold and was completed in 1980.[24][26] Scorsese worked with the editor, Thelma Schoonmaker, to achieve a final cut of the film. Their main decision was to ditch Schrader's idea of LaMotta's nightclub act intervening with the flashback of his youth and instead just follow along the lines of a single flashback where only scenes of LaMotta practicing his stand-up would be left "bookending" the film.[27] A sound mix arranged by Frank Warner was a delicate process taking six months.[26] According to Scorsese, the sound on Raging Bull was difficult because each punch, camera shot, and flash bulb would be different. Also, there was the issue of trying to balance the quality between scenes featuring dialogue and those involving boxing (which were done in Dolby).[24] Raging Bull went through a test screening in front of a small audience including the chief executives of United Artists, Steven Bach and Andy Albeck. The screening was shown at the MGM screening room in New York around July 1980. Later, Albeck praised Scorsese by calling him a "true artist".[26] According to the producer, Irwin Winkler, matters were made worse when United Artists decided not to distribute the film but no other studios were interested when they attempted to sell the rights.[26] Scorsese made no secret that Raging Bull would be his "Hollywood swan song" and he took unusual care of its rights during post-production.[7] This caused some friction with Irwin Winkler, who accused Scorsese of doing the editing process "inch by inch". Scorsese threatened to remove his credit from the film if he was not allowed to sort a reel which obscured the name of a whisky brand known as "Cutty Sark" which was heard in a scene. The work was completed only four days shy of the premiere.[28]The brew of violence and anger, combined with the lack of a proper advertising campaign, led to the film's lukewarm box office intake of only $23 million, when compared to its $18 million budget. Scorsese became concerned for his future career and worried that producers and studios might refuse to finance his films.[29] According to Box Office Mojo, the film grossed $23,383,987 in domestic theaters.[30]Raging Bull first premiered in New York on December 19, 1980 to polarized reviews.[26][27] Jack Kroll of Newsweek called Raging Bull "the best movie of the year"[26] Vincent Canby of The New York Times said that Scorsese "has made his most ambitious film as well as his finest" and went on to praise Moriarty's debut performance as "either she is one of the film finds of the decade or Mr. Scorsese is Svengali. Perhaps both."[29] Time praised De Niro's performance since "much of Raging Bull exists because of the possibilities it offers De Niro to display his own explosive art".[29] Steven Jenkins from the British Film Institute's (BFI) magazine, Monthly Film Journal said "Raging Bull may prove to be Scorsese's finest achievement to date".[29]Raging Bull was nominated for eight Academy Awards (including Best Picture, Director, Actor, Supporting Actress, Supporting Actor, Cinematography, Sound (Donald O. Mitchell, Bill Nicholson, David J. Kimball and Les Lazarowitz), and Editing) at the 1980 Academy Awards.[29][31][32] The film won two awards: Best Actor, for De Niro, and Best Film Editing.[29]The Oscars were held the day after President Ronald Reagan was shot by John Hinckley Jr., who did it as an attempt to impress Jodie Foster, who played a child prostitute in another of Scorsese's famous films, Taxi Driver.[33] Out of fear of being attacked, Scorsese went to the ceremony with FBI bodyguards disguised as guests who escorted him out before the announcement of the Academy Award for Best Picture was made (the winner being Ordinary People).The Los Angeles Film Critics Association voted Raging Bull the best film of 1980 and best actor for De Niro. The National Board of Review also voted best actor for De Niro and best supporting actor to Pesci. The Golden Globes awarded another best actor award for De Niro and National Society of Film Critics gave best cinematography to Chapman. The Berlin Film Festival chose Raging Bull to open the festival in 1981.[29]By the end of the 1980s, Raging Bull had cemented its reputation as a modern classic. It was voted the best film of the 1980s in numerous critics' polls and is regularly pointed to as both Scorsese's best film and one of the finest American movies ever made.[34] Several prominent critics, among them Roger Ebert, declared the film to be an instant classic and the consummation of Scorsese's earlier promise. Ebert proclaimed it the best film of the 1980s,[35] and one of the ten greatest films of all time.[36] The film has been deemed "culturally, historically, and aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry in 1990.[37] The film currently holds a 98% "Certified Fresh" rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes, with an average rating of 9.1/10.[38] The similarly themed Metacritic rates the movie 92/100 ("universal acclaim").[39]Raging Bull was listed by Time magazine as one of the All-TIME 100 Movies.[40] Variety magazine ranked the film number 39 on their list of the 50 greatest movies.[41] Raging Bull was fifth on Entertainment Weekly's list of the 100 Greatest Movies of All Time.[42] The film tied with The Bicycle Thieves and Vertigo at number 6 on Sight and Sound's 2002 poll of the greatest movies ever.[43] When Sight & Sound's directors' and critics' lists are combined, Raging Bull gets most points of all movies that has been produced since 1974.[44] In 2002, Film 4 held a poll of the 100 Greatest Movies, on which Raging Bull was voted in at number 20.[45] Halliwell's Film Guide, a British film guide, placed Raging Bull seventh in a poll naming their selection for the "Top 1,000 Movies".[46] In 2008, Empire magazine held a poll of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time, taking votes from 10,000 readers, 150 film makers and 50 film critics: Raging Bull was placed at number 11.[47] It was also placed on a similar list of 1000 movies by The New York Times.[48] In 2010, Total Film selected the film as one of The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time.[49] FilmSite.org, a subsidiary of American Movie Classics, placed Raging Bull on their list of the 100 greatest movies.[50] Additionally, Films101.com ranked the film as the 16th best movie of all time (a list of the 9,335 most notable).[51]Martin Scorsese decided to assemble a soundtrack made of music that was popular at the time using his personal collection of 78s. With the help of Robbie Robertson the songs were carefully chosen so they would be the ones that one would hear on the radio, at the pool or in bars and clubs reflecting the mood of that particular era.[56][57] Some lyrics from songs would be slipped into some dialogue. The Intermezzo from Cavalleria rusticana by Italian composer Pietro Mascagni would serve as the main theme to Raging Bull after a successful try-out by Scorsese and the editor, Thelma Schoonmaker over the film's opening titles.[57] Two other Mascagni pieces were used in the film: the Barcarolle from Silvano, and the Intermezzo from Guglielmo Ratcliff.[58] A two-CD soundtrack was released in 2005, long after the film was released, because of earlier difficulties receiving permissions for many of the songs, which Scorsese selected from his childhood memories growing up in New York.In 2006, Variety reported that Sunset Pictures was developing a sequel entitled Raging Bull II: Continuing the Story of Jake LaMotta, chronicling LaMotta's early life, as told in the sequel novel of the same name.[59] As of June 15, 2012 shooting has begun with William Forsythe as an older LaMotta and Morjean Aria as the younger version (before the events of the first film).[60] The film, directed by Martin Guigui also stars Joe Mantegna, Tom Sizemore, Penelope Ann Miller, Natasha Henstridge, Alicia Witt, Ray Wise, Harry Hamlin, Bill Bellamy, and James Russo as Rocky Graziano.[61]In July 2012, MGM, owners of its predecessor, filed a lawsuit against LaMotta and the producers of Raging Bull II to keep the new film from being released. The former party argued that they have rights to make any authorized sequel to the original book, which goes back to an agreement LaMotta and co-author Peter Savage made with Chartoff-Winkler, producers of the original film. In addition, MGM argues that the defendants are publicly claiming the film to be a sequel to the original film, which could most likely "tarnish" its predecessor's reputation.[62] In August 2012, the producers retitled the film The Bronx Bull, disassociating itself as a sequel to Raging Bull, and the lawsuit was subsequently dropped.[63]December 19, 1980(1980-12-19)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Screenplay
3.3 Casting
3.4 Principal photography
3.5 Post-production

3.1 Development3.2 Screenplay3.3 Casting3.4 Principal photography3.5 Post-production4 Reception

4.1 Box office
4.2 Critical reception
4.3 Awards
4.4 Legacy

4.4.1 American Film Institute recognition



4.1 Box office4.2 Critical reception4.3 Awards4.4 Legacy

4.4.1 American Film Institute recognition

4.4.1 American Film Institute recognition5 Soundtrack6 Sequel7 Notes8 References9 External links3.1 Development3.2 Screenplay3.3 Casting3.4 Principal photography3.5 Post-production4.1 Box office4.2 Critical reception4.3 Awards4.4 Legacy

4.4.1 American Film Institute recognition

4.4.1 American Film Institute recognition4.4.1 American Film Institute recognitionRobert De Niro as Italian American middleweight boxer Jake LaMotta [3]Cathy Moriarty as Vickie Thailer[3]Joe Pesci as Joey LaMotta[3]Nicholas Colasanto as Tommy Como[3]Theresa Saldana as Lenora LaMotta (Joey's wife)[3]Frank Vincent as Salvy "Batts"[3]Mario Gallo as Mario[3]Frank Adonis as PatsyAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies: #24[52]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills: #51[53]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition): #4[54]AFI's 10 Top 10: #1 Sports[55]Baxter, John (2006). De Niro A Biography.Biskind, Peter (1998). Easy Riders, Raging Bulls. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN0-684-80996-6.Evans, Mike (2006). The Making of Raging Bull. London: Unanimous Ltd. ISBN1-903318-83-1.Thompson, Christie, David, Ian (1996). Scorsese on Scorsese.Raging Bull at the Internet Movie DatabaseRaging Bull at the TCM Movie DatabaseRaging Bull at FilmSite.orgRaging Bull at Box Office MojoRaging Bull at Rotten TomatoesRaging Bull at MetacriticRaging Bull at AllRoviE.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (often referred to simply as E.T.) is a 1982 American science fiction film co-produced and directed by Steven Spielberg, written by Melissa Mathison and starring Henry Thomas, Dee Wallace, Robert MacNaughton, Drew Barrymore, and Peter Coyote. It tells the story of Elliott (played by Thomas), a lonely boy who befriends an extraterrestrial, dubbed "E.T.", who is stranded on Earth. Elliott and his siblings help the extraterrestrial return home while attempting to keep it hidden from their mother and the government.The concept for E.T. was based on an imaginary friend Spielberg created after his parents' divorce in 1960. In 1980, Spielberg met Mathison and developed a new story from the stalled science fiction/horror film project Night Skies. The film was shot from September to December 1981 in California on a budget of US$10.5 million. Unlike most motion pictures, the film was shot in roughly chronological order, to facilitate convincing emotional performances from the young cast.Released by Universal Pictures, E.T. was a blockbuster, surpassing Star Wars to become the highest-grossing film of all timea record it held for ten years until Jurassic Park, another Steven Spielberg film surpassed it in 1993. Critics acclaimed it as a timeless story of friendship, and it ranks as the greatest science fiction film ever made in a Rotten Tomatoes survey. The film was re-released in 1985, and then again in 2002 to celebrate the film's 20th anniversary, with altered shots and additional scenes.The film opens in a California forest as a group of alien botanists collect flora samples. U.S. government agents appear on the scene (in various civilian 4x4 trucks of the era), and the aliens flee in their spaceship, mistakenly leaving one of their own behind. The scene shifts to a suburban home, where a boy named Elliott, age 10, is trying to hang out with his 16-year-old brother Michael and his friends. As he returns from picking up a pizza, Elliott discovers that something is hiding in their toolshed. The creature promptly flees upon being discovered. Despite his family's disbelief, Elliott lures the alien from the forest to his bedroom using a trail of Reese's Pieces candy. Before he goes to sleep, Elliott realizes the alien is imitating his movements.Elliott feigns illness the next morning to stay home from school and play with the alien. Later that day Michael and their sister, 5-year-old Gertie, meet the alien. They decide to keep him hidden from their mother. When they ask it about its origin, the alien levitates several balls to represent its solar system and then demonstrates its powers by reviving a dead plant.At school the next day, Elliott begins to experience a psychic connection with the alien. Exhibiting signs of intoxication due to the alien drinking beer, Elliott begins freeing all the frogs from a dissection class. As the alien watches John Wayne kiss Maureen O'Hara in The Quiet Man, Elliott's link causes him to kiss a girl he likes.The alien learns to speak English by repeating what Gertie says as she watches Sesame Street and, at Elliott's urging, dubs itself "E.T." E.T. reads a comic strip where Buck Rogers, stranded, calls for help by building a makeshift communication device, and is inspired to try it himself. He gets Elliott's help in building a device to "phone home" by using a Speak & Spell toy. Michael notices that E.T.'s health is declining and that Elliott is referring to himself as "we".On Halloween, Michael and Elliott dress E.T. as a ghost so they can sneak him out of the house. Elliott and E.T. ride a bicycle to the forest, where E.T. makes a successful call home. The next morning, Elliott wakes up in the field, only to find E.T. gone, so he returns home to his distressed family. Michael searches for and finds E.T. dying in a ditch and takes him to Elliott, who is also dying. Mary becomes frightened when she discovers her son's illness and the dying alien, just as government agents invade the house.Scientists set up a medical facility there, quarantining Elliott and E.T. Their link disappears and E.T. then appears to die while Elliott recovers. A grief-stricken Elliott is left alone with the motionless alien when he notices a dead flower, the plant E.T. had previously revived, coming back to life. E.T. reanimates and reveals that his people are returning. Elliott and Michael steal a van that E.T. had been loaded into and a chase ensues, with Michael's friends joining them as they attempt to evade the authorities by bicycle. Suddenly facing a dead end, they escape as E.T. uses telekinesis to lift them into the air and toward the forest.Standing near the spaceship, E.T.'s heart glows as he prepares to return home. Mary, Gertie, and "Keys", a government agent, show up. E.T. says goodbye to Michael and Gertie, as Gertie presents E.T. with the plant that he had revived. Before entering the spaceship, E.T. tells Elliott "I'll be right here", pointing his glowing finger to Elliott's forehead. He then picks up the plant Gertie gave him, walks into the spaceship, and takes off, leaving a rainbow in the sky as Elliott (and the rest of them) watches the ship leave.Having worked with Cary Guffey on Close Encounters of the Third Kind, Spielberg felt confident in working with a cast composed mostly of child actors.[3] For the central role of Elliott, he auditioned hundreds of boys[4] before Robert Fisk suggested Henry Thomas for the role.[5] Thomas, who auditioned in an Indiana Jones costume, did not perform well in the formal testing, but got the filmmakers' attention in an improvised scene.[3] Thoughts of his dead dog inspired his convincing tears.[6] Robert MacNaughton auditioned eight times to play Michael, sometimes with boys auditioning for Elliott. Spielberg felt Drew Barrymore had the right imagination for mischievous young Gertie after she impressed him with a story that she led a punk rock band.[5] Spielberg enjoyed working with the children, and he later said that the experience made him feel ready to be a father.[7]The major voice work for E.T. was performed by Pat Welsh, an elderly woman who lived in Marin County, California. Welsh smoked two packets of cigarettes a day, which gave her voice a quality that sound effects creator Ben Burtt liked. She spent nine-and-a-half hours recording her part, and was paid $380 by Burtt for her services.[8] Burtt also recorded 16 other people and various animals to create E.T.'s "voice". These included Spielberg; Debra Winger; Burtt's sleeping wife, who had a cold; a burp from his USC film professor; and raccoons, sea otters, and horses.[9][10]Doctors working at the USC Medical Center were recruited to play the doctors who try to save E.T. after government agents take over Elliott's home. Spielberg felt that actors in the roles, performing lines of technical medical dialogue, would come across as unnatural.[7] During post-production, Spielberg decided to cut a scene featuring Harrison Ford as the headmaster at Elliott's school. The scene featured Ford's character reprimanding Elliott for his behavior in science class and warning of the dangers of underage drinking; he is then taken aback as Elliott's chair rises from the floor, while E.T. is levitating his "phone" equipment up the staircase with Gertie.[5]After his parents' divorce in 1960, Spielberg filled the void with an imaginary alien companion. Spielberg said that E.T. was "a friend who could be the brother I never had and a father that I didn't feel I had anymore."[11] During 1978, Spielberg announced he would shoot a film entitled Growing Up, which he would film in 28 days. The project was set aside because of delays on 1941, but the concept of making a small autobiographical film about childhood would stay with Spielberg.[8] He also thought about a follow-up to Close Encounters of the Third Kind, and began to develop a darker project he had planned with John Sayles called Night Skies in which malevolent aliens terrorize a family.[8]Filming Raiders of the Lost Ark in Tunisia left Spielberg bored, and memories of his childhood creation resurfaced.[12] He told screenwriter Melissa Mathison about Night Skies, and developed a subplot from the failed project, in which Buddy, the only friendly alien, befriends an autistic child. Buddy's abandonment on Earth in the script's final scene inspired the E.T. concept.[12] Mathison wrote a first draft titled E.T. and Me in eight weeks,[12] which Spielberg considered perfect.[5] The script went through two more drafts, which deleted an "Eddie Haskell"-esque friend of Elliott. The chase sequence was also created, and Spielberg also suggested having the scene where E.T. got drunk.[8] Columbia Pictures, which had been producing Night Skies, met Spielberg to discuss the script. The studio passed on it, calling it "a wimpy Walt Disney movie", so Spielberg approached the more receptive Sid Sheinberg, president of MCA.[13]Ed Verreaux created a $700,000 prototype for E.T., which Spielberg deemed useless.[8] Carlo Rambaldi, who designed the aliens for Close Encounters of the Third Kind, was hired to design the animatronics of E.T. Rambaldi's own painting Women of Delta led him to give the creature a unique, extendable neck.[5] The creature's face was inspired by the faces of Carl Sandburg, Albert Einstein and Ernest Hemingway.[14] Producer Kathleen Kennedy visited the Jules Stein Eye Institute to study real and glass eyeballs. She hired Institute staffers to create E.T.'s eyes, which she felt were particularly important in engaging the audience.[3] Four E.T. heads were created for filming, one as the main animatronic and the others for facial expressions, as well as a costume.[14] Two dwarfs, Tamara De Treaux and Pat Bilon,[8] as well as 12-year-old Matthew DeMeritt, who was born without legs,[15] took turns wearing the costume, depending on what scene was being filmed. DeMeritt actually walked on his hands and played all scenes where E.T. walked awkwardly or fell over. The head of the E.T. puppet was placed above the head of the actors, and the actors could see through slits in the puppet's chest.[5] Caprice Roth, a professional mime, filled prosthetics to play E.T.'s hands.[3] The puppet was created in three months at the cost of $1.5 million.[16] Spielberg declared it was "something that only a mother could love."[5] Mars, Incorporated found E.T. so ugly that the company refused to allow M&M's to be used in the film, believing the creature would frighten children. This allowed the Hershey Company the opportunity to market Reese's Pieces.[17] Science and technology educator Henry Feinberg created E.T.'s communicator device.[18][19]E.T. began shooting in September 1981.[20] The project was filmed under the cover name A Boy's Life, as Spielberg did not want anyone to discover and plagiarize the plot. The actors had to read the script behind closed doors, and everyone on set had to wear an ID card.[3] The shoot began with two days at a high school in Culver City, and the crew spent the next 11 days moving between locations at Northridge and Tujunga.[8] The next 42 days were spent at Laird International Studios in Culver City, for the interiors of Elliott's home. The crew shot at a redwood forest near Crescent City for the last six days of production.[8][12] Spielberg shot the film in roughly chronological order to achieve convincingly emotional performances from his cast. In the scene in which Michael first encounters the alien, the creature's appearance caused MacNaughton to jump back and knock down the shelves behind him. The chronological shoot gave the young actors an emotional experience as they bonded with E.T., making the hospital sequences more moving.[7] Spielberg ensured the puppeteers kept away from the set to maintain the illusion of a real alien. For the first time in his career, he did not storyboard most of the film, in order to facilitate spontaneity in the performances.[20] The film was shot so adults, except for Dee Wallace, are never seen from the waist up in the first half of the film, as a tribute to the cartoons of Tex Avery.[5] The shoot was completed in 61 days, four days ahead of schedule.[12] According to Spielberg, the memorable scene where E.T. disguises himself as a stuffed animal in Elliott's closet was suggested by colleague Robert Zemeckis, after he read a draft of the screenplay that Spielberg had sent him.[21]Longtime Spielberg collaborator John Williams, who composed the musical score for E.T., described the challenge of creating a score that would generate sympathy for such an odd-looking creature. As with their previous collaborations, Spielberg liked every theme Williams composed and had it included. Spielberg loved the music for the final chase so much that he edited the sequence to suit it.[22] Williams took a modernist approach, especially with his use of polytonality, which refers to the sound of two different keys played simultaneously. The Lydian mode can also be used in a polytonal way. Williams combined polytonality and the Lydian mode to express a mystic, dreamlike and heroic quality. His themeemphasizing coloristic instruments such as the harp, piano, celesta, and other keyboards, as well as percussionsuggests the childlike nature of E.T. and his "machine."[23]There were allegations that the film was plagiarized from a 1967 script, The Alien, by celebrated Indian Bengali director Satyajit Ray. Ray stated, "E.T. would not have been possible without my script of The Alien being available throughout the United States in mimeographed copies." Spielberg denied this claim, stating, "I was a kid in high school when his script was circulating in Hollywood."[24] Star Weekend Magazine disputes Spielberg's claim, pointing out that he had graduated from high school in 1965 and began his career as a director in Hollywood in 1969.[25] Besides E.T., some believe that another earlier Spielberg film, Close Encounters of the Third Kind (1977), was also inspired by The Alien.[26][27]Veteran filmmakers Martin Scorsese and Richard Attenborough too pointed out Spielberg's influences from Ray's script.[28]Spielberg drew the story of E.T. from the divorce of his own parents;[29] Gary Arnold of The Washington Post called the film "essentially a spiritual autobiography, a portrait of the filmmaker as a typical suburban kid set apart by an uncommonly fervent, mystical imagination".[30] References to Spielberg's childhood occur throughout: Elliott feigns illness by holding his thermometer to a light bulb while covering his face with a heating pad, a trick frequently employed by the young Spielberg.[31] Michael's picking on Elliott echoes Spielberg's teasing of his younger sisters,[5] and Michael's evolution from tormentor to protector reflects how Spielberg had to take care of his sisters after their father left.[7]Critics have focused on the parallels between the life of E.T. and Elliott, who is "alienated" by the loss of his father.[32][33] A.O. Scott of The New York Times wrote that while E.T. "is the more obvious and desperate foundling", Elliott "suffers in his own way from the want of a home."[34] E.T. is the first and last letter of Elliott's name.[35] At the film's heart is the theme of growing up. Critic Henry Sheehan described the film as a retelling of Peter Pan from the perspective of a Lost Boy (Elliott): E.T. cannot survive physically on Earth, as Pan could not survive emotionally in Neverland; government scientists take the place of Neverlands pirates.[36] Vincent Canby of The New York Times similarly observed that the film "freely recycles elements from [...] Peter Pan and The Wizard of Oz".[37] Some critics have suggested that Spielberg's portrayal of suburbia is very dark, contrary to popular belief. According to A.O. Scott, "The suburban milieu, with its unsupervised children and unhappy parents, its broken toys and brand-name junk food, could have come out of a Raymond Carver story."[34] Charles Taylor of Salon.com wrote, "Spielberg's movies, despite the way they're often characterized, are not Hollywood idealizations of families and the suburbs. The homes here bear what the cultural critic Karal Ann Marling called 'the marks of hard use'."[29]Other critics found religious parallels between E.T. and Jesus.[39][40] Andrew Nigels described the story of E.T. as "crucifixion by military science" and "resurrection by love and faith".[41] According to Spielberg biographer Joseph McBride, Universal Pictures appealed directly to the Christian market, with a poster reminiscent of Michelangelo's Creation of Adam and a logo reading "Peace".[12] Spielberg answered that he did not intend the film to be a religious parable, joking, "If I ever went to my mother and said, 'Mom, I've made this movie that's a Christian parable,' what do you think she'd say? She has a kosher restaurant on Pico and Doheny in Los Angeles."[38]As a substantial body of film criticism has built up around E.T., numerous writers have analyzed the film in other ways as well. E.T. has been interpreted as a modern fairy tale[42] and in psychoanalytic terms.[33][42] Producer Kathleen Kennedy noted that an important theme of E.T. is tolerance, which would be central to future Spielberg films such as Schindler's List.[5] Having been a loner as a teenager, Spielberg described the film as "a minority story".[43] Spielberg's characteristic theme of communication is partnered with the ideal of mutual understanding: he has suggested that the story's central alien-human friendship is an analogy for how real-world adversaries can learn to overcome their differences.[44]E.T. was previewed in Houston, Texas, where it received high marks from viewers.[12] The film premiered at the closing gala of the 1982 Cannes Film Festival,[45][46] and was released in the United States on June 11, 1982. It opened at number one with a gross of $11 million, and stayed at the top of the box office for six weeks; it then fluctuated between the first and second positions until October, before returning to the top spot for the final time in December.[47]In 1983 the film superseded Star Wars as the highest-grossing film of all-time,[48] and by the end of its theatrical run it had grossed $359 million in North America and $619 million worldwide.[2][49] Spielberg earned $500,000 a day from his share of the profits,[50][51] while the Hershey Company's profits rose 65% due to the film's prominent use of Reese's Pieces.[17]The film was re-released in 1985 and 2002, earning another $60 million and $68 million respectively,[52][53] for a worldwide total of $792 million with North America accounting for $435 million.[2] E.T. held the global record until it was usurped by Jurassic Parkanother Spielberg directed filmin 1993,[54] although it managed to hold on to the domestic record for a further four years, where a Star Wars reissue saw that film reclaim the record.[55] It was eventually released on VHS and laserdisc on October 27, 1988; to combat piracy, the tapeguards on the videocassettes were colored green, and encoded with macrovision.[6] In North America alone, VHS sales came to $75 million.[56]E.T. was the first major film to have been seriously affected by video piracy. The usual account is that the public in some areas were becoming impatient at long delays getting E.T. to their cinemas; an illegal group realized this, got hold of a copy of the film for a night by bribing a projectionist, and made it into a video by projecting the film with sound and videorecording the screen and the sound. The resulting video was used as a master to run off very many copies, which were widely sold illegally.[57]Critics acclaimed E.T. as a classic. Roger Ebert wrote, "This is not simply a good movie. It is one of those movies that brush away our cautions and win our hearts."[45] Michael Sragow of Rolling Stone called Spielberg "a space age Jean Renoir.... [F]or the first time, [he] has put his breathtaking technical skills at the service of his deepest feelings."[58] Leonard Maltin would include it in his list of "100 Must-See Films of the 20th Century" as one of only two movies from the 1980s.[59] George Will was one of the few to pan the film, feeling it spread subversive notions about childhood and science.[60]E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial holds a 98% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.[61] It has a Metacritic score of 94.[62] In addition to the many impressed critics, President Ronald Reagan and first lady Nancy Reagan were moved by the film after a screening at the White House on June 27, 1982.[51] Princess Diana was in tears after watching the film.[5] On September 17, 1982, the film was screened at the United Nations, and Spielberg received the U.N. Peace Medal.[63]The film was nominated for nine Oscars at the 55th Academy Awards, including Best Picture. Gandhi won that award, but its director, Richard Attenborough, declared, "I was certain that not only would E.T. win, but that it should win. It was inventive, powerful, [and] wonderful. I make more mundane movies."[65] It won four Academy Awards: Best Original Score, Best Sound (Robert Knudson, Robert Glass, Don Digirolamo, Gene Cantamessa), Best Sound Effects Editing (Charles L. Campbell and Ben Burtt) , and Best Visual Effects.[66]At the Golden Globes, the film won Best Picture in the Drama category and Best Score; it was also nominated for Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best New Male Star for Henry Thomas. The Los Angeles Film Critics Association awarded the film Best Picture, Best Director, and a "New Generation Award" for Melissa Mathison.[67]The film won Saturn Awards for Best Science Fiction Film, Best Writing, Best Special Effects, Best Music, and Best Poster Art, while Henry Thomas, Robert McNaughton, and Drew Barrymore won Young Artist Awards. In addition to his Golden Globe and Saturn, composer John Williams won a Grammy and a BAFTA for the score. E.T. was also honored abroad: the film won the Best Foreign Language Film award at the Blue Ribbon Awards in Japan, Cinema Writers Circle Awards in Spain, Csar Awards in France, and David di Donatello in Italy.[68]In American Film Institute polls, E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial has been voted the 24th greatest film of all time,[69] the 44th most heart-pounding,[70] and the sixth most inspiring.[71] Other AFI polls rated it as having the 14th greatest music score[72] and as the third greatest science-fiction film.[73] The line "E.T. phone home" was ranked 15th on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes list,[74] and 48th on Premiere's top movie quote list.[75] The character of Elliot was nominated for AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains as one of the 50 greatest heroes.[76] In 2005, the film topped a Channel 4 poll of the 100 greatest family films,[77] and was also listed by Time as one of the 100 best films ever made.[78]In 2003, Entertainment Weekly called the film the eighth most "tear-jerking";[79] in 2007, in a survey of both films and television series, the magazine declared E.T. the seventh greatest work of science-fiction media in the past 25 years.[80] The Times also named E.T. as their ninth favorite alien in a film, calling it "one of the best-loved non-humans in popular culture".[81] The film is among the top ten in the BFI list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14. In 1994, E.T. was selected for preservation in the U.S. National Film Registry.[82]In 2011, ABC aired Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time, revealing the results of a poll of fans conducted by ABC and People magazine: E.T. was selected as the fifth best film of all time and the second best science fiction filmOn October 22, 2012, Madame Tussauds unveiled wax likenesses of E.T. at six of its international locations.[83]An extended version of the film, including altered special effects, was released on March 22, 2002. Certain shots of E.T. had bothered Spielberg since 1982, as he did not have enough time to perfect the animatronics. Computer-generated imagery (CGI), provided by Industrial Light & Magic (ILM), was used to modify several shots, including ones of E.T. running in the opening sequence and being spotted in the cornfield. The spaceship's design was also altered to include more lights. Scenes shot for but not included in the original version were introduced. These included E.T. taking a bath, and Gertie telling Mary that Elliott went to the forest on Halloween night. Spielberg did not add the scene featuring Harrison Ford, feeling that would reshape the film too drastically. Spielberg became more sensitive about the scene where gun-wielding federal agents threaten Elliott and his escaping friends and had the guns digitally replaced with walkie-talkies.[5]At the premiere, John Williams conducted a live performance of the score.[84] The new release grossed $68 million in total, with $35 million coming from Canada and the United States.[53] The changes to the film, particularly the escape scene, were criticized as political correctness. Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wondered, "Remember those guns the feds carried? Thanks to the miracle of digital, they're now brandishing walkie-talkies.... Is this what two decades have done to free speech?"[85] Chris Hewitt of Empire wrote, "The changes are surprisingly low-key...while ILM's CGI E.T. is used sparingly as a complement to Carlo Rambaldi's extraordinary puppet."[86] South Park ridiculed many of the changes in the 2002 episode "Free Hat".[87]The two-disc DVD release which followed in October 22, 2002 contained both the original theatrical and the 20th Anniversary extended versions of the film. Spielberg personally demanded the release to feature both versions.[88] The two-disc DVD release, as well as a three-disc collector's edition containing a "making of" book and special features that were unavailable on the two-disc edition,[89] were placed in moratorium on December 31, 2002. Later, E.T. was re-released on DVD as a single-disc re-issue in 2005, featuring only the 20th Anniversary version.In a June 2011 interview, Spielberg said that in the future,"There's going to be no more digital enhancements or digital additions to anything based on any film I direct.... When people ask me which E.T. they should look at, I always tell them to look at the original 1982 E.T. If you notice, when we did put out E.T. we put out two E.T.s. We put out the digitally enhanced version with the additional scenes and for no extra money, in the same package, we put out the original 82 version. I always tell people to go back to the 82 version."[90]The 30th Anniversary edition was released on October 9, 2012 for Blu-ray and DVD, which included a fully restored version of the original film, re-instating the original animatronic close-ups and the shotguns.[91]In July 1982, during the film's first theatrical run, Spielberg and Mathison wrote a treatment for a sequel to be titled E.T. II: Nocturnal Fears. It would have seen Elliott and his friends kidnapped by evil aliens and follow their attempts to contact E.T. for help. Spielberg decided against pursuing the sequel, feeling it "would do nothing but rob the original of its virginity".[92]Atari, Inc. made a video game based on the film for the Atari 2600. Released in 1982, it was widely considered to be one of the worst video games ever made. William Kotzwinkle, author of the film's novelization, wrote a sequel, E.T.: The Book of the Green Planet, which was published in 1985. In the novel, E.T. returns home to the planet Brodo Asogi, but is subsequently demoted and sent into exile. E.T. then attempts to return to Earth by effectively breaking all the laws of Brodo Asogi.[93] E.T. Adventure, a theme park ride, debuted at Universal Studios Florida in 1990. The $40 million attraction features the title character saying goodbye to visitors by name.[12]In 1998, E.T. was licensed to appear in television public service announcements produced by the Progressive Corporation. The announcements featured E.T.'s voice reminding drivers to "buckle up" their safety belts. Traffic signs depicting a stylized E.T. wearing a safety belt were installed on selected roads around the United States.[94] The following year, British Telecommunications launched the "Stay in Touch" campaign, with E.T. as the star of various advertisements. The campaign's slogan was "B.T. has E.T.", with "E.T." also taken to mean "extra technology".[95] At Spielberg's suggestion, George Lucas included members of E.T.'s species as background characters in Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace (1999).[96]June 11, 1982(1982-06-11)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Filming
3.3 Allegations of plagiarism

3.1 Development3.2 Filming3.3 Allegations of plagiarism4 Themes5 Reception

5.1 Release and sales
5.2 Critical response
5.3 Awards and honors

5.1 Release and sales5.2 Critical response5.3 Awards and honors6 20th anniversary version7 Other portrayals8 References9 Bibliography10 External links3.1 Development3.2 Filming3.3 Allegations of plagiarism5.1 Release and sales5.2 Critical response5.3 Awards and honorsHenry Thomas as Elliott, a lonely ten-year-old boy. Elliott longs for a good friend, whom he finds in E.T., who was left behind on Earth. Elliott adopts the stranded alien and they form a mental, physical, and emotional bond.Robert MacNaughton as Michael, Elliott's football-playing sixteen-year-old brother who often makes fun of him but he tries to help Elliott with E.TDrew Barrymore as Gertie, Elliott's mischievous five-year-old sister. She is sarcastic and initially terrified of E.T., but grows to love the alien.Dee Wallace as Mary, the children's mother, recently separated from her husband. She is mostly oblivious to the alien's presence in her household.Peter Coyote as "Keys", a government agent. His face is not shown until the second half of the film, his name is never mentioned, and he is identified by the key rings that prominently hang from his belt. He tells Elliott that he has waited to see an alien since the age of ten.K. C. Martel, Sean Frye and C. Thomas Howell as Greg, Steve and Tyler, Michael's friends. They help Elliott and E.T. evade the authorities during the film's climax.Erika Eleniak as the young girl Elliott kisses in class.Brode, Douglas (1995). The Films of Steven Spielberg. Carol Publishing. ISBN0-8065-1951-7.Kotzwinkle, William (1985). E.T.: The Book of the Green Planet. Berkley Books. ISBN0-425-07642-3.McBride, Joseph (1997). Steven Spielberg: A Biography. Da Capo Press. ISBN0-306-80900-1.Rubin, Susan Goldman (2001). Steven Spielberg. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN0-8109-4492-8.Shay, Don; Duncan, Jody (2001). The Making of Jurassic Park: An Adventure 65 Million Years in the Making. Boxtree. ISBN1-85283-774-8.Worsley, Sue Dwiggins (1997). From Oz to E.T.: Wally Worsley's Half-Century in Hollywood. Scarecrow Press. ISBN0-8108-3277-1.E.T. The Extra Terrestrial WikiOfficial homepage for the 20th anniversary editionNocturnal Fears Sequel treatment by Spielberg and Melissa MathisonE.T. the Extra-Terrestrial at the Internet Movie DatabaseE.T. the Extra-Terrestrial at AllRoviE.T. the Extra-Terrestrial at Rotten TomatoesE.T. the Extra-Terrestrial at Box Office MojoE.T. the Extra-Terrestrial at MetacriticE.T. the Extra-Terrestrial at Yahoo!Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb, commonly known as Dr. Strangelove, is a 1964 black comedy film which satirizes the nuclear scare. It was directed, produced, and co-written by Stanley Kubrick, starring Peter Sellers and George C. Scott, and featuring Sterling Hayden, Keenan Wynn, and Slim Pickens. The film is loosely based on Peter George's Cold War thriller novel Red Alert, also known as Two Hours to Doom.The story concerns an unhinged United States Air Force general who orders a first strike nuclear attack on the Soviet Union. It follows the President of the United States, his advisors, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and a Royal Air Force (RAF) officer as they try to recall the bombers to prevent a nuclear apocalypse. It separately follows the crew of one B-52 as they try to deliver their payload.In 1989, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry. It was listed as number three on AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs.United States Air Force Brigadier General Jack D. Ripper (Sterling Hayden) is commander of Burpelson Air Force Base, which houses the SAC B-52 airborne alert bomber force just hours from the Soviet border. Ripper orders his executive officer, Group Captain Lionel Mandrake of the RAF (Peter Sellers), to put the base on alert, asserting that it is not a drill. The alert is sent to the patrolling aircraft, including one piloted by Aircraft commander Major T. J. "King" Kong (Slim Pickens) and his crew. All the aircraft commence an attack flight on Russia, and lock out unauthorized external communications through the CRM 114 Discriminator.Mandrake discovers that no order for war has been received, and tries to stop Ripper, who locks them both in his office. Ripper reveals to Mandrake that he believes the Soviets have been using fluoridation of United States' water supplies to pollute the "precious bodily fluids" of Americans.At The Pentagon, General Buck Turgidson (George C. Scott) briefs President Merkin Muffley (Sellers) in the "War Room" along with several other top officers and aides about the attack. Muffley is shocked to learn that such orders could be given without his authorization, although he had OK'ed this in the case of Soviet first-strike attack on Washington D.C. Turgidson reports that his men are trying to cycle through every CRM code to issue the stand-down order but this could take over two days. Muffley orders Turgidson to storm the base and seize Ripper, though Turgidson warns that Ripper may have already alerted his men to this possibility.Gen. Turgidson attempts to convince Muffley to let the attack continue, as their first strike on the Soviets would wipe out the majority of the Soviet missiles, and the little they could retaliate with would only cost a few million American lives. Muffley refuses, and instead brings in the Soviet ambassador Alexei de Sadeski (Peter Bull) to get Soviet premier Dimitri Kisov on the "Hot Line". The President alerts the Premier to the situation, and authorizes the USSR to fire upon the US planes to stop the attack.After a heated discussion, the ambassador explains that the Soviet Union has created a doomsday device consisting of 50 buried bombs with "Cobalt Thorium G" set to detonate should any nuclear attack strike their country; the Soviets had conceived of this after reading a New York Times article claiming the United States was also working on such a device. The President's wheelchair-bound scientific advisor, a sinister German named Dr. Strangelove (Sellers), considers that this is a ploy, as a secret doomsday device would be an ineffectual deterrent. Sadeski admits they had plans to reveal its existence the following week, as a surprise for the Premier's birthday.U.S. Army airborne forces arrive at Burpelson, but as predicted, the base's troops consider the troops to be Soviets in disguise and open fire. Despite many casualties, the Army forces eventually overtake the base. Before he can be restrained, Ripper shoots himself. Colonel "Bat" Guano (Keenan Wynn) forces his way into Ripper's office. He initially suspects Mandrake of being an enemy, but Mandrake convinces him otherwise.Mandrake has identified the proper recall code for the bombers from Ripper's desk blotter doodles, and SAC is able to contact the bomber planes and send them away from Soviet air space. The War Room celebrates. However, Sadeski reports that of the four planes that the Soviets had believed shot down, they cannot account for one of them - that of Major Kong. Anti-aircraft fire had ruptured the fuel tank and caused the CRM aboard Kong's plane to self-destruct, leaving the crew no way to receive the counter-order. President Muffley gives the plane's original destination to the Soviets, to allow them to concentrate on finding it. However, due to the fuel loss, Major Kong has changed the destination to a closer high-priority target, a ICBM complex at Kodlosk.On approaching the new target, the crew discovers that the bomb release mechanism has been damaged. Major Kong tries to repair the damage, but ends up falling out of the plane along with the bomb; he straddles the bomb and rides it like a rodeo cowboy as it falls and detonates.While discussing the aftereffects of the activation of the doomsday device, Sadeski notes that, within ten months, the surface of the earth will be uninhabitable. Dr. Strangelove recommends that the President gather several hundreds of thousands of people, with a high female-to-male ratio, to live in deep mineshafts in order to escape the radiation, and to then institute a breeding program to allow the United States to repopulate the surface after a hundred years have passed. Gen. Turgidson warns that the Soviets will likely do the same.At this point, Dr. Strangelove suddenly shouts that he has a plan, and miraculously gets up from his wheelchair, takes a few halting steps and shouts, "Mein Fhrer! I can walk!" The film then cuts to a montage of nuclear detonations, accompanied by Vera Lynn's recording of "We'll Meet Again."Columbia Pictures agreed to finance the film on condition that Peter Sellers play at least four major roles. This condition stemmed from the studio's impression that much of the success of Lolita (1962), Kubrick's previous film, was based on Sellers' performance in which his single character assumes a number of identities. Sellers had also played three roles in 1959's The Mouse That Roared. Kubrick accepted the demand, later explaining that "such crass and grotesque stipulations are the sine qua non of the motion-picture business."[3][4]Peter Sellers playingSellers ended up playing just three of the four roles written for him. He was expected to play Air Force Major T. J. "King" Kong, the B-52 Stratofortress aircraft commander, but from the beginning Sellers was reluctant. He felt his workload was too heavy and he worried he would not properly portray the character's Texas accent. Kubrick pleaded with him and asked screenwriter Terry Southern (who had been raised in Texas) to record a tape with Kong's lines spoken in the correct accent. Using Southern's tape, Sellers managed to get the accent right, and started shooting the scenes in the airplane. But then Sellers sprained an ankle and could not work in the cramped cockpit set.[3][4][6]Sellers is said to have improvised much of his dialogue, with Kubrick incorporating the ad-libs into the written screenplay so that the improvised lines became part of the canonical screenplay; a technique known as retroscripting.[7]According to film critic Alexander Walker, the author of biographies of both Sellers and Kubrick, the role of Lionel Mandrake was the easiest of the three for Sellers to play, as he was aided by his experience of mimicking his superiors while serving in the RAF during World War II.[7] There is also a heavy resemblance to Sellers' friend and occasional co-star Terry-Thomas and the prosthetic-limbed RAF ace Douglas Bader.For his performance as President Merkin Muffley, Sellers flattened his natural English accent to resemble an American Midwesterner. Sellers drew inspiration for the role from Adlai Stevenson,[7] a former Illinois governor who was the Democratic candidate for the 1952 and 1956 presidential elections and the U.N. ambassador during the Cuban Missile Crisis.In early takes, Sellers faked cold symptoms to emphasize the character's apparent weakness. This caused frequent laughter among the film crew, ruining several takes. Kubrick ultimately found this comic portrayal inappropriate, feeling that Muffley should be a serious character.[7] In later takes Sellers played the role straight, though the President's cold is still evident in several scenes.In keeping with Kubrick's satirical character names, a "merkin" is a pubic hair wig. The president is bald, and his last name is "Muffley"; both are additional homages to a merkin.The title character, Dr. Strangelove, who was not in the original book,[8] serves as President Muffley's scientific adviser in the War Room, presumably making use of his prior work as a Nazi scientist. When General Turgidson wonders aloud what kind of name "Strangelove" is, saying to Mr. Staines (Jack Creley) that it is not a "Kraut name," Staines responds that Strangelove's original German surname was "Merkwrdigliebe," without mentioning that "Merkwrdigliebe" translates to "Strangelove" in English. Twice in the film, Strangelove "accidentally" addresses the president as "Mein Fhrer".The character is an amalgamation of RAND Corporation strategist Herman Kahn, mathematician and Manhattan Project principal John von Neumann, German rocket scientist Wernher von Braun and Edward Teller, the "father of the hydrogen bomb."[9] There is a common misconception that the character was based on Henry Kissinger, but Kubrick and Sellers denied this.[10] In fact, Kissinger was not a presidential adviser until 1969. The wheelchair-using Strangelove furthers a Kubrick trope of the menacing, seated antagonist, first depicted in Lolita through the character "Dr. Zaempf."[11] Strangelove's accent was influenced by that of Austrian-American photographer Weegee, who worked for Kubrick as a special photographic effects consultant.[7] Strangelove's appearance echoes the mad scientist archetype as seen in the character Rotwang in Fritz Lang's 1927 film Metropolis. Sellers' Strangelove takes from Rotwang the single black gloved hand (which in Rotwang's case is mechanical because of a lab accident), the wild hair and, most importantly, his inability to be completely controlled by political power.[12] According to film critic Alexander Walker, Sellers improvised Dr. Strangelove's lapse into the Nazi salute, borrowing one of Kubrick's black leather gloves for the uncontrollable hand that makes the gesture. Dr. Strangelove apparently suffers from diagnostic apraxia, or alien hand syndrome. Kubrick wore the gloves on the set to avoid being burned when handling hot lights, and Sellers, recognizing the potential connection to Lang's work, found them to be menacing.[7]Slim Pickens, an established character actor and veteran of many Western films, was eventually chosen to replace Sellers as Major Kong after Sellers' injury. Terry Southern's biographer, Lee Hill, said the part was originally written with John Wayne in mind, and that Wayne was offered the role after Sellers was injured but he immediately turned it down.[13] Dan Blocker of the Bonanza western television series was approached to play the part, but according to Southern, Blocker's agent rejected the script as being "too pinko."[14] Kubrick then recruited Pickens, whom he knew from Picken's work in Marlon Brando's One-Eyed Jacks.[13]Fellow actor James Earl Jones recalls, "He was Major Kong on and off the set he didn't change a thing his temperament, his language, his behavior." Pickens was not told that the movie was a comedy and was only given the script for scenes he was in, to get him to play it "straight."[15]Kubrick biographer John Baxter explained the documentary Inside the Making of Dr. Strangelove:As it turns out, Slim Pickens had never left the United States. He had to hurry and get his first passport. He arrived on the set, and somebody said, "Gosh, he's arrived in costume!," not realizing that that's how he always dressed... with the cowboy hat and the fringed jacket and the cowboy boots and that he wasn't putting on the character that's the way he talked.Pickens, who had previously played only minor supporting and character roles, said his appearance as Maj. Kong greatly improved his career. He later commented, "After Dr. Strangelove the roles, the dressing rooms and the checks all started getting bigger."[16]Kubrick tricked Scott into playing the role of Gen. Turgidson far more ridiculously than Scott was comfortable doing. Kubrick talked Scott into doing over the top "practice" takes, which Kubrick told Scott would never be used, as a way to warm up for the "real" takes. Kubrick used these takes in the final film, causing Scott to swear never to work with Kubrick again.[17]During the filming, Kubrick and Scott had different opinions regarding certain scenes, but Kubrick got Scott to conform largely by repeatedly beating him at chess, which they played frequently on the set.[18] Scott, a skilled player himself, later said that while he and Kubrick may not have always seen eye to eye, he respected Kubrick immensely for his skill at chess.Kubrick started with nothing but a vague idea to make a thriller about a nuclear accident, building on the widespread Cold War fear for survival.[19] While doing research, Kubrick gradually became aware of the subtle and unstable "balance of terror" between nuclear powers. At Kubrick's request, Alastair Buchan (the head of the Institute for Strategic Studies), recommended the thriller novel Red Alert by Peter George.[20] Kubrick was impressed with the book, which had also been praised by game theorist and future Nobel Prize in Economics winner Thomas Schelling in an article written for the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists and reprinted in The Observer,[21] and immediately bought the film rights.[22]In collaboration with George, Kubrick started writing a screenplay based on the book. While writing the screenplay, they benefited from some brief consultations with Schelling and, later, Herman Kahn.[23] In following the tone of the book, Stanley Kubrick originally intended to film the story as a serious drama. But, as he later explained during interviews, he began to see comedy inherent in the idea of mutual assured destruction as he wrote the first draft. Kubrick said:My idea of doing it as a nightmare comedy came in the early weeks of working on the screenplay. I found that in trying to put meat on the bones and to imagine the scenes fully, one had to keep leaving out of it things which were either absurd or paradoxical, in order to keep it from being funny; and these things seemed to be close to the heart of the scenes in question.[24]Among the titles Kubrick considered for the film were Dr. Doomsday or: How to Start World War III Without Even Trying, Dr. Strangelove's Secret Uses of Uranus, and Wonderful Bomb.[25] After deciding to make the film a black comedy, Kubrick brought in Terry Southern as a co-writer. The choice was influenced by reading Southern's comic novel The Magic Christian, which Kubrick had received as a gift from Peter Sellers[3] (which, coincidentally, became a Sellers film in 1969).Dr. Strangelove was filmed at Shepperton Studios, in London, as Peter Sellers was in the middle of a divorce at the time and unable to leave England.[26] The sets occupied three main sound stages: the Pentagon War Room, the B-52 Stratofortress bomber and the last one containing both the motel room and General Ripper's office and outside corridor.[3] The studio's buildings were also used as the Air Force base exterior. The film's set design was done by Ken Adam, the production designer of several James Bond films (at the time he had already worked on Dr. No). The black and white cinematography was by Gilbert Taylor, and the film was edited by Anthony Harvey and Stanley Kubrick (uncredited). The original musical score for the film was composed by Laurie Johnson and the special effects were by Wally Veevers. The theme of the chorus from the bomb run scene is a modification of When Johnny Comes Marching Home.For the War Room, Ken Adam first designed a two-level set which Kubrick initially liked, only to decide later that it was not what he wanted. Adam next began work on the design that was used in the film, an expressionist set that was compared with The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari and Fritz Lang's Metropolis. It was an enormous concrete room (130 feet (40m) long and 100 feet (30m) wide, with a 35-foot (11m)-high ceiling[22]) suggesting a bomb shelter, with a triangular shape (based on Kubrick's idea that this particular shape would prove the most resistant against an explosion). One side of the room was covered with gigantic strategic maps reflecting in a shiny black floor inspired by the dance scenes in old Fred Astaire films. In the middle of the room there was a large circular table lit from above by a circle of lamps, suggesting a poker table. Kubrick insisted that the table be covered with green baize (although this could not be seen in the black and white film) to reinforce the actors' impression that they are playing 'a game of poker for the fate of the world.'[27] Kubrick asked Adam to build the set ceiling in concrete to force the director of photography to use only the on-set lights from the circle of lamps. Moreover, each lamp in the circle of lights was carefully placed and tested until Kubrick was happy with the result.[28]Lacking cooperation from the Pentagon in the making of the film, the set designers reconstructed the aircraft cockpit to the best of their ability by comparing the cockpit of a B-29 Superfortress and a single photograph of the cockpit of a B-52, and relating this to the geometry of the B-52's fuselage. The B-52 was state-of-the-art in the 1960s, and its cockpit was off-limits to the film crew. When some United States Air Force personnel were invited to view the reconstructed B-52 cockpit, they said that "it was absolutely correct, even to the little black box which was the CRM."[7] It was so accurate that Kubrick was concerned whether Ken Adam's production design team had done all of their research legally, fearing a possible investigation by the FBI.[7]In several shots of the B-52 flying over the polar ice en route to Russia, the shadow of the actual camera plane, a Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress, is visible on the snow below. The B-52 was a scale model composited into the arctic footage which was sped up to create a sense of jet speed.[29] Home movie footage included in Inside the Making of Dr. Strangelove on the 2001 Special Edition DVD release of the film shows clips of the Fortress with a cursive "Dr. Strangelove" painted over the rear entry hatch on the right side of the fuselage.Red Alert author Peter George collaborated on the screenplay with Kubrick and satirist Terry Southern. Red Alert was more solemn than its film version and it did not include the character of Dr. Strangelove, though the main plot and technical elements were quite similar. A novelization of the actual film, rather than a re-print of the original novel, was published by George, based on an early draft in which the film was meant to be bookended by aliens trying to understand what happened after arriving at a wrecked Earth.During the filming of Dr. Strangelove, Stanley Kubrick learned that Fail-Safe, a film with a similar theme, was being produced. Although Fail-Safe was to be an ultra-realistic thriller, Kubrick feared that its plot resemblance would damage his film's box office potential, especially if it were released first. Indeed, the novel Fail-Safe (on which the film of the same name is based) is so similar to Red Alert that Peter George sued on charges of plagiarism and settled out of court.[30] What worried Kubrick most was that Fail-Safe boasted acclaimed director Sidney Lumet and first-rate dramatic actors Henry Fonda as the American President and Walter Matthau as the advisor to the Pentagon, Professor Groeteschele. Kubrick decided to throw a legal wrench into Fail-Safe's production gears. Lumet recalled in the documentary, Inside the Making of Dr. Strangelove: "We started casting. Fonda was already set... which of course meant a big commitment in terms of money. I was set, Walter [Bernstein, the screenwriter] was set... And suddenly, this lawsuit arrived, filed by Stanley Kubrick and Columbia Pictures."Kubrick argued that Fail Safe's own 1960 source novel of the same name had been plagiarized from Peter George's Red Alert, to which Kubrick owned creative rights, and pointed out unmistakable similarities in intentions between the characters Groeteschele and Strangelove. The plan worked, and Fail-Safe opened eight months behind Dr. Strangelove, to critical acclaim but mediocre ticket sales.The end of the film shows Dr. Strangelove exclaiming "Mein Fhrer, I can walk!" before cutting to footage of nuclear explosions, with Vera Lynn singing "We'll Meet Again." This footage comes from nuclear tests such as shot BAKER of Operation Crossroads at Bikini Atoll, the Trinity test, the bombing of Nagasaki, a test from Operation Sandstone and the great hydrogen bomb tests from Operation Redwing and Operation Ivy. In some shots old warships (such as the German heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen), which were used as targets, are plainly visible. In others the smoke trails of rockets used to create a calibration backdrop can be seen.Former Goon Show writer, and friend of Sellers, Spike Milligan, was credited with suggesting the Vera Lynn music for the ending.It was originally planned for the film to end with a scene that was filmed, with everyone in the war room involved in a pie fight.Accounts vary as to why the pie fight was cut. In a 1969 interview, Kubrick said: "I decided it was farce and not consistent with the satiric tone of the rest of the film."[26] Critic Alexander Walker observed that "the cream pies were flying around so thickly that people lost definition, and you couldn't really say whom you were looking at."[7] Nile Southern, son of screenwriter Terry Southern, suggested the fight was intended to be less jovial. "Since they were laughing, it was unusable, because instead of having that totally black, which would have been amazing, like, this blizzard, which in a sense is metaphorical for all of the missiles that are coming, as well, you just have these guys having a good old time. So, as Kubrick later said, 'it was a disaster of Homeric proportions.'"[7]A first test screening of the film was scheduled for November 22, 1963, the day of the John F. Kennedy assassination. The film was just weeks from its scheduled premiere, but because of the assassination the release was delayed until late January 1964, as it was felt that the public was in no mood for such a film any sooner.One line by Slim Pickens "a fella could have a pretty good weekend in Dallas with all that stuff" was dubbed to change "Dallas" to "Vegas," since Dallas was the city where Kennedy was killed. The original reference to Dallas survives in the French-subtitled version of the film.The assassination also serves as another possible reason why the pie-fight scene was cut. In the scene General Turgidson exclaims, "Gentlemen! Our gallant young president has been struck down in his prime!" after Muffley takes a pie in the face. Editor Anthony Harvey states that "[the scene] would have stayed, except that Columbia Pictures were horrified, and thought it would offend the president's family."[31]In 1994 the film was re-released. While the 1964 release used the 1.85:1 aspect ratio, the new print was in the slightly more narrow 1.66:1 (5:3) ratio, as Kubrick had originally intended.[32]Dr. Strangelove takes passing shots at numerous Cold War attitudes, such as the "missile gap", but it primarily focuses its satire on the theory of mutual assured destruction (MAD),[33] in which each side is supposed to be deterred from a nuclear war by the prospect of a universal cataclysmic disaster regardless of who "won". Military strategist and former physicist Herman Kahn, in his 1960 On Thermonuclear War, used the theoretical example of a doomsday machine to illustrate the concept of mutual assured destruction (MAD);[34] in effect, Kahn argued, both sides already had a sort of doomsday machine, since their nuclear arsenals were large enough to destroy most life on Earth. Kahn, a leading 1950s critic of American strategy, urged America to plan for a limited nuclear war, and later in the 1960s became one of the architects of the MAD doctrine. Kahn held that a nuclear war was inherently suicidal (because it is unwinnable) thus neither side would be willing to engage in all-out nuclear war. Kahn came over as cold and calculating, for example in his willingness to estimate how many human lives the USA could lose and still rebuild economically.[35] This attitude is reflected in Turgidson's remark to the president about the outcome of a pre-emptive nuclear war: "Mr. President, I'm not saying we wouldn't get our hair mussed. But I do say no more than ten to twenty million killed, tops, uh, depending on the breaks." Turgidson has a binder that is labelled "World Targets in Megadeaths", a term coined in 1953 by Kahn and popularized in his 1960 book On Thermonuclear War.The plan to regenerate the human race from the people sheltered in mineshafts is a parody of Nelson Rockefeller's, Edward Teller's, Herman Kahn's, and Chet Holifield's 1961 plan to spend billions of dollars on a nationwide network of concrete-lined underground fallout shelters capable of holding millions of people.[36] This proposed fallout shelter network has similarities and contrasts to that of the very real and robust Swiss civil defense network. Switzerland has an overcapacity of nuclear fallout shelters for the country's population size, and by law, new homes must still be built with a fallout shelter.[37][38]To refute early 1960s novels and Hollywood films like Fail-Safe and Dr. Strangelove which raised questions about U.S. control over nuclear weapons, the Air Force produced a documentary film SAC Command Post to demonstrate its responsiveness to presidential command and its tight control over nuclear weapons[39]The film is often ranked by critics and directors amongst the greatest comedies of all time, and was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. In 2000, readers of Total Film magazine voted it the 24th greatest comedic film of all time. It holds a 100% "Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 61 reviews.[40] It is ranked number 21 in the All-Time High Scores chart of Metacritic's Video/DVD section with an average score of 96,.[41] It is also listed as number 26 on Empire's 500 Greatest Movies of All Time.Roger Ebert has Dr. Strangelove in his list of Great Movies,[42] saying it is "arguably the best political satire of the century." It is also rated as the fifth greatest film in Sight & Sounds directors poll the only comedy in the top ten.[43]The film was nominated for four Academy Awards and also seven BAFTA Awards, of which it won four.In addition, the film won the best written American comedy award from the Writers Guild of America and a Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation.Kubrick won two awards for best director, from the New York Film Critics Circle and the Italian National Syndicate of Film Journalists, and was nominated for one by the Directors Guild of America.January 29, 1964(1964-01-29)1 Plot2 Cast

2.1 Peter Sellers' multiple roles
2.2 Slim Pickens as Major T. J. "King" Kong
2.3 George C. Scott as General Buck Turgidson

2.1 Peter Sellers' multiple roles2.2 Slim Pickens as Major T. J. "King" Kong2.3 George C. Scott as General Buck Turgidson3 Production

3.1 Novel and screenplay
3.2 Sets and filming
3.3 Fail-Safe
3.4 Ending
3.5 Original ending: the pie fight
3.6 The Kennedy assassination
3.7 1994 re-release

3.1 Novel and screenplay3.2 Sets and filming3.3 Fail-Safe3.4 Ending3.5 Original ending: the pie fight3.6 The Kennedy assassination3.7 1994 re-release4 Themes

4.1 Satirizing the Cold War

4.1 Satirizing the Cold War5 Reception6 Awards and honors7 See also8 References9 Further reading10 External links2.1 Peter Sellers' multiple roles2.2 Slim Pickens as Major T. J. "King" Kong2.3 George C. Scott as General Buck Turgidson3.1 Novel and screenplay3.2 Sets and filming3.3 Fail-Safe3.4 Ending3.5 Original ending: the pie fight3.6 The Kennedy assassination3.7 1994 re-release4.1 Satirizing the Cold WarPeter Sellers as:

Group Captain Lionel Mandrake, a British RAF exchange officer
President Merkin Muffley, the American President and Commander-in-Chief
Dr. Strangelove, the wheelchair-bound nuclear war expert and former Nazi, whose gloved but uncontrollable right hand apparently has a mind of its own

Group Captain Lionel Mandrake, a British RAF exchange officerPresident Merkin Muffley, the American President and Commander-in-ChiefDr. Strangelove, the wheelchair-bound nuclear war expert and former Nazi, whose gloved but uncontrollable right hand apparently has a mind of its ownGeorge C. Scott as General Buck Turgidson, an over-the-top and jingoist general who does not trust the Soviet ambassadorSterling Hayden as Brigadier General Jack D. Ripper, a paranoid ultra-nationalistKeenan Wynn as Colonel "Bat" Guano, the Army officer who finds Mandrake and the dead RipperSlim Pickens as Major T. J. Kong, the B-52 Stratofortress bomber's commander and pilotPeter Bull as Soviet Ambassador Alexei de SadeskiJames Earl Jones as Lieutenant Lothar Zogg, the B-52's bombardierTracy Reed as Miss Scott, General Turgidson's secretary and mistress, the film's only female character. Reed also appears as "Miss Foreign Affairs," the centerfold in the June 1962 issue[1] of Playboy magazine that Major Kong is shown reading in the cockpit.[2]Shane Rimmer as Capt. "Ace" Owens, the B-52 co-pilotGroup Captain Lionel Mandrake, a British RAF exchange officerPresident Merkin Muffley, the American President and Commander-in-ChiefDr. Strangelove, the wheelchair-bound nuclear war expert and former Nazi, whose gloved but uncontrollable right hand apparently has a mind of its ownBest Actor in a Leading Role: Peter SellersBest Adapted Screenplay: Stanley Kubrick, Peter George, Terry SouthernBest Director: Stanley KubrickBest PictureBest British Actor: Peter SellersBest British Screenplay: Stanley Kubrick, Peter George, Terry SouthernBest Foreign Actor: Sterling HaydenBest British Art Direction (Black and White): Ken AdamBest British FilmBest Film From Any SourceUN award.1998 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #262000 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs #32003 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Brigadier General Jack D. Ripper nominated villain
Dr. Strangelove nominated villain

Brigadier General Jack D. Ripper nominated villainDr. Strangelove nominated villain2005 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Gentlemen, you can't fight in here! This is the War Room!" #64
"Mein Fhrer! I can walk!" nominated

"Gentlemen, you can't fight in here! This is the War Room!" #64"Mein Fhrer! I can walk!" nominated2007 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #39Brigadier General Jack D. Ripper nominated villainDr. Strangelove nominated villain"Gentlemen, you can't fight in here! This is the War Room!" #64"Mein Fhrer! I can walk!" nominatedCRM 114Dead HandFilms considered the greatest everPolitics in fictionStanley Kubrick ArchiveOperation Paperclip OSS program used to recruit scientists from Nazi GermanyDolan Edward F. Jr. Hollywood Goes to War. London: Bison Books, 1985. ISBN 0-86124-229-7.Hardwick, Jack and Schnepf, Ed. "A Viewer's Guide to Aviation Movies." The Making of the Great Aviation Films, General Aviation Series, Volume 2, 1989.Henriksen, Margot A. (1987). Dr. Strangelove's America: Society and Culture in the Atomic Age. University of California Press. ISBN0-520-08310-5. http://www.ucpress.edu/books/pages/6232.php.Oriss, Bruce. When Hollywood Ruled the Skies: The Aviation Film Classics of World War II. Hawthorne, California: Aero Associates Inc., 1984. ISBN 0-9613088-0-X.Rice, Julian (2008). Kubrick's Hope: Discovering Optimism from 2001 to Eyes Wide Shut. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN0-8108-6206-9.Dr. Strangelove at the Internet Movie DatabaseDr. Strangelove at the TCM Movie DatabaseDr. Strangelove at AllRoviDr. Strangelove at Rotten TomatoesCheckup with Dr. Strangelove by Terry SouthernDon't Panic covers Dr. StrangeloveContinuity transcriptCommentary on Dr. Strangelove by Brian SianoLast Secrets of Strangelove Revealed by Grant B. StillmanStudy Guide by Dan Lindley. See also: longer versionAnnotated bibliography on Dr. Strangelove from the Alsos Digital LibraryBonnie and Clyde is a 1967 American crime film directed by Arthur Penn and starring Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway as the title characters Clyde Barrow and Bonnie Parker. The film features Michael J. Pollard, Gene Hackman, and Estelle Parsons, with Denver Pyle, Dub Taylor, Gene Wilder, Evans Evans, and Mabel Cavitt. The screenplay was written by David Newman and Robert Benton. Robert Towne and Beatty provided uncredited contributions to the script; Beatty also produced the film. The soundtrack was composed by Charles Strouse.Bonnie and Clyde is considered a landmark film, and is regarded as one of the first films of the New Hollywood era, since it broke many cinematic taboos and was popular with the younger generation. Its success motivated other filmmakers to be more forward about presenting sex and violence in their films. The film's ending also became iconic as "one of the bloodiest death scenes in cinematic history".[3]The film received Academy Awards for Best Supporting Actress (Estelle Parsons) and Best Cinematography (Burnett Guffey). It was among the first 100 films selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.In the middle of the Great Depression, Clyde Barrow (Warren Beatty) and Bonnie Parker (Faye Dunaway) meet when Clyde tries to steal Bonnie's mother's car. Bonnie, who is bored by her job as a waitress, is intrigued with Clyde, and decides to take up with him and become his partner in crime. They pull off some holdups, but their amateur efforts, while exciting, are not very lucrative.The duo's crime spree shifts into high gear once they hook up with a dim-witted gas station attendant, C.W. Moss (Michael J. Pollard), then with Clyde's older brother Buck (Gene Hackman) and his wife, Blanche (Estelle Parsons), a preacher's daughter. The women dislike each other on first sight, and their feud only escalates from there: shrill Blanche has nothing but disdain for Bonnie, Clyde and C.W., while gun-moll Bonnie sees Blanche's flighty presence as a constant danger to the gang's well-being.Bonnie and Clyde turn from pulling small-time heists to robbing banks. Their exploits also become more violent. When C.W. botches a bank robbery by parallel parking the getaway car, Clyde shoots the bank manager in the face after he jumps onto the slow-moving car's running board. The gang is pursued by law enforcement, including Texas Ranger Frank Hamer (Denver Pyle), who is captured and humiliated by the outlaws, then set free. A raid later catches the outlaws off guard, mortally wounding Buck with a gruesome shot to his head and injuring Blanche. Bonnie, Clyde and C.W. barely escape with their lives. With Blanche sightless and in police custody, Hamer tricks her into revealing C.W.'s name, who was up until now still only an "unidentified suspect."Hamer locates Bonnie, Clyde and C.W. hiding at the house of C.W.'s father Ivan Moss (Dub Taylor), who thinks the couple  and an ornate tattoo  have corrupted his son. He strikes a bargain with Hamer: in exchange for leniency for the boy, he helps set a trap for the outlaws. When Bonnie and Clyde stop on the side of the road to help Mr. Moss fix a flat tire, the police in the bushes open fire and riddle them violently. Hamer and his posse then come out of hiding, looking pensively at the couple's bodies.Actor Gene Wilder made his film debut as Eugene Grizzard, one of Bonnie and Clyde's hostages. His girlfriend Velma Davis was played by Evans Evans, who was the wife of film director John Frankenheimer.The family gathering scene was filmed in Red Oak, Texas. Several local residents were watching the film being shot, when the filmmakers noticed Mabel Cavitt, a local school teacher, among the people gathered, who was then chosen to play Bonnie Parker's mother.[4][5]The film was intended as a romantic and comic version of the violent gangster films of the 1930s, updated with modern filmmaking techniques.[6] Arthur Penn portrayed some of the violent scenes with a comic tone, sometimes reminiscent of Keystone Kops-style slapstick films, then shifted disconcertingly into horrific and graphic violence.[7] The film was strongly influenced by the French New Wave directors, both in its rapid shifts of tone, and in its choppy editing, which is particularly noticeable in the film's closing sequence.[7]The film was originally offered to Franois Truffaut, the best-known director of the New Wave movement, who made contributions to the script. He passed on the project to make Fahrenheit 451.[8] The producers approached Jean-Luc Godard next. Some sources claim Godard didn't trust Hollywood and refused; Richard Benton claimed that Godard wanted to shoot the film in New Jersey in January and took offense when would-be producer Norah Wright objected that was unreasonable considering the story took place in Texas with its year round warm environment[9] while her partner, Elinor Jones,[10] claimed they did not believe Godard was right for the project in the first place. After attending a screening of the completed film, Godard was asked what he thought of the film and reportedly replied, "Great! Now let's go make Bonnie and Clyde."When Warren Beatty was on board as producer only, his sister Shirley MacLaine was a strong possibility to play Bonnie. But when Beatty decided to play Clyde, obviously a different actress was called for. Those considered for the role were Jane Fonda, Tuesday Weld, Ann-Margret, Leslie Caron, Carol Lynley and Sue Lyon. Cher auditioned for the part, while Warren Beatty begged Natalie Wood to play the role. Wood declined the role to concentrate more on her therapy at the time, and acknowledged that working with Beatty before was "difficult."The film is forthright in its handling of sexuality, but that theme was toned down from its conception. Originally, Benton and Newman wrote Clyde as bisexual and he and Bonnie were to have a three-way sexual relationship with their male getaway driver. However, Arthur Penn persuaded the writers that the relationship's emotional complexity was underwritten, it dissipated the passion of the title characters and it would harm the audience's sympathy for the characters who would write them off as sexual deviants because they are criminals. Others claimed that Beatty was not willing to have his character display that kind of sexuality and that the Production Code would never allow such content in the first place.[11] Instead, Clyde is portrayed as unambiguously heterosexual, if impotent. When Clyde brandishes his gun to display his manhood, Bonnie suggestively strokes the phallic symbol. Like the 1950 film Gun Crazy, Bonnie and Clyde portrays crime as alluring and intertwined with sex. Because Clyde is impotent, his attempts to physically woo Bonnie are frustrating and anti-climactic.Bonnie and Clyde was one of the first films to feature extensive use of squibs  small explosive charges, often mounted with bags of stage blood, that are detonated inside an actor's clothes to simulate bullet hits. Released in an era where shootings were generally depicted as bloodless and painless, the Bonnie and Clyde death scene was one of the first in mainstream American cinema to be depicted with graphic realism.Beatty had originally wanted the film to be shot in black and white, but Warner Bros. rejected this idea. As it stood, much of the senior management of the studio was hostile towards this film project, especially Jack Warner who considered the subject matter an unwanted throwback to Warner Brothers' early period when gangster films were common product.[12] In addition, Warner was already annoyed at Beatty who refused to star in the film, PT 109 at his behest and was insolent enough to defy his favorite gesture of authority of showing the studio water tower with the WB logo on it by responding "Well, it's got your name, but it's got my initials."[13] In addition, Warner complained about the film's extensive location shooting in Texas that exceeded its production schedule and budget until he ordered the crew back to the studio backlot, which it had planned to anyway for final process shots.[14]At first, Warner Brothers did not promote Bonnie and Clyde for general release, but instead mounted only limited regional releases that seemed to confirm its misgivings about the film's lack of commercial appeal, despite the fact the film was doing excellent sustained business in select urban theatres.[15] In fact, while Jack Warner was selling the studio to Seven Arts, he would have had the film dumped but for the fact that Israel, of whom Warner was a major supporter, had scored a triumphant victory in the Seven Days War, and he was in too defiant a mood to sell any of his studio's films.[16] Meanwhile, Warren Beatty, Bonnie and Clyde's producer and star, complained to Warner Brothers that if the company was willing to go to so much trouble for Reflections in a Golden Eye (they had changed the coloration scheme at considerable expense), which was getting poor reviews, their neglect of his film, which was getting excellent press, suggested a conflict of interest; he threatened to sue the company. Warner Brothers gave Beatty's film a general release. It eventually became a major box office success.[17]The instrumental banjo piece "Foggy Mountain Breakdown" by Flatt and Scruggs was introduced to a worldwide audience as a result of its frequent use in the movie. Its use is strictly anachronistic as the bluegrass-style of music dates from the mid-1940s rather than the 1930s, but the functionally similar Old-time music genre was long established and widely recorded at the period in which the film is set. Long out of print in vinyl and cassette formats, the film soundtrack album was finally released on CD in 2009.The film considerably simplifies the lives of Bonnie and Clyde, which included other gang members, repeated jailings, other murders and a horrific auto accident that left Parker burned and a near invalid. One of the film's major characters, "C.W. Moss", is a composite of two members of the Barrow Gang: William Daniel "W.D." Jones and Henry Methvin.The Gene Wilder-Evans Evans sequence is based on the kidnappings of the undertaker H.D. Darby and his acquaintance Sophia Stone, near Ruston, Louisiana on April 27, 1933.[18] In the film, Velma and Eugene are romantically involved; Stone and Darby were not.The film strays farthest from fact in its portrayal of the Texas Ranger Frank Hamer (played by Denver Pyle) as a vengeful bungler who had been captured, humiliated, and released by Bonnie and Clyde. Hamer was already a legendary Texas Ranger when he was coaxed out of semi-retirement to hunt down the duo; he had never seen them before he and his posse ambushed and killed them near Gibsland, Louisiana on May 23, 1934.[19] In 1968, Hamer's widow and son sued the movie producers for defamation of character over his portrayal. They were awarded an out-of-court settlement in 1971.[20]The film portrays an unarmed and unsuspecting Clyde walking away from the car to investigate the broken down truck when he was ambushed. It suggests that Bonnie, still in their car, may also have been unarmed. Both remained in the vehicle and had weapons at the ready in the front seat; the back seat contained a dozen guns and thousands of rounds of ammunition.[21] Neither outlaw got out of the car alive.The couple's notoriety in 1933 came from photos found by police as undeveloped film in a hastily abandoned hideout in Joplin, Missouri. In one, Bonnie holds a gun in her hand and a cigar between her teeth. Its publication nationwide typed her as a dramatic gun moll. The film portrays the taking of this playful photo. It implies the gang sent photos  and poetry  to the press, but this is untrue. The police found most of the gang's items in the Joplin cache. Bonnie's final poem, read aloud by her in the movie, was only publicized posthumously from her mother.The only two members of the Barrow Gang who were alive at the time of the film's release were Blanche Barrow and W. D. Jones. While Blanche Barrow approved the depiction of her in the original version of the script, she objected to the later re-writes. At the film's release, she complained loudly about Estelle Parsons's portrayal of her, saying, "That film made me look like a screaming horse's ass!"[22]In 1968, W.D. Jones outlined his time with the Barrows in a Playboy magazine article.[23] That same year, he filed a lawsuit against Warner Brothers-Seven Arts, claiming that the film Bonnie and Clyde "maligned and brought shame and disrepute" on him and damaged his character by implying that he was complicit in the betrayal of his old partners. He repeated what he had said at his arrest in 1933, that far from being a willing member of the gang, he had tried to escape several times.[24][25] There is no record that his petition was ever heard by a court.The movie was partly filmed in and around Dallas, Texas, in some cases using locations of banks that Bonnie and Clyde were reputed to have robbed at gunpoint.[26]Warner Bros.-Seven Arts had so little faith in the film that, in a then-unprecedented move, they offered its first-time producer Warren Beatty 40% of the gross instead of a minimal fee. The movie went on to gross over $70 million worldwide by 1973. This made him a wealthy man and free to take on projects he wanted to do.[citation needed]The film was controversial on its original release for its supposed glorification of murderers, and for its level of graphic violence, which was unprecedented at the time. Bosley Crowther of The New York Times was so appalled that he began to campaign against the increasing brutality of American films.[27] Dave Kaufman of Variety criticized the film for uneven direction and for portraying Bonnie and Clyde as bumbling fools.[28] Joe Morgenstern for Newsweek initially panned the film as a "squalid shoot-'em-up-up for the moron trade." After seeing the film a second time and noticing the enthusiastic audience, he wrote a second article saying he had misjudged it and praised the film. Warner Brothers took advantage of this, marketing the film as having made a major critic change his mind about its virtues.[29]Roger Ebert gave Bonnie and Clyde a largely positive review, giving it four stars out of a possible four. He called the film "a milestone in the history of American movies, a work of truth and brilliance." More than 30 years later, he added the film to his "Great Movies" list. Film critics Dave Kehr and James Berardinelli have also praised the film in the years since.The fierce debate about the film is discussed at length in For the Love of Movies: The Story of American Film Criticism. This 2009 documentary film chronicles what occurred as a result: the New York Times fired Bosley Crowther because his negative review seemed so out of touch with the public, and Pauline Kael, who wrote a lengthy freelance essay in The New Yorker in praise of the film, became the magazine's new staff critic.Estelle Parsons won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her portrayal of Blanche Barrow, and Burnett Guffey won an Academy Award for Best Cinematography.The film was also nominated for:Some critics cite Joseph H. Lewis's Gun Crazy, a 1950 film noir about a bank-robbing couple (also based loosely on the real Bonnie and Clyde), as a major influence on this film. Forty years after its premiere, Bonnie and Clyde has been cited as a major influence for such disparate films as The Wild Bunch, The Godfather, The Departed,[31] and Natural Born Killers.[32] Bonnie and Clyde were also the subject of a popular 1967 French pop song performed by Serge Gainsbourg and Brigitte Bardot. Some aspects of the Bollywood movie Bunty aur Babli are inspired by this movie.August 13, 1967(1967-08-13)1 Plot2 Cast

2.1 Cast notes

2.1 Cast notes3 Production and style

3.1 Music

3.1 Music4 Historical accuracy5 Reception6 Awards and honors

6.1 Academy Awards
6.2 Others

6.1 Academy Awards6.2 Others7 Influence8 Notes9 External links2.1 Cast notes3.1 Music6.1 Academy Awards6.2 OthersWarren Beatty as Clyde BarrowFaye Dunaway as Bonnie ParkerMichael J. Pollard as C.W. MossGene Hackman as Buck BarrowEstelle Parsons as Blanche BarrowDenver Pyle as Frank HamerDub Taylor as Ivan MossGene Wilder as Eugene GrizzardEvans Evans as Velma DavisMabel Cavitt as Mrs. ParkerBest PictureBest Director - Arthur PennBest Writing, Story and Screenplay - Written Directly for the Screen - David Newman and Robert BentonBest Actor in a Leading Role - Warren BeattyBest Actress in a Leading Role - Faye DunawayBest Actor in a Supporting Role - Michael J. PollardBest Actor in a Supporting Role - Gene HackmanBest Costume Design - Theadora Van RunkleIn 1992, Bonnie and Clyde was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."1998 - AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #272001 - AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills - #132002 - AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions - #652003 - AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains

Clyde Barrow & Bonnie Parker - #32 Villains

Clyde Barrow & Bonnie Parker - #32 Villains2005 - AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes - #41

"We rob banks."- #41

"We rob banks."- #412007 - AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #422008 - AFI's 10 Top 10 - #5 Gangster Film [30]Clyde Barrow & Bonnie Parker - #32 Villains"We rob banks."- #41Bonnie and Clyde at the Internet Movie DatabaseBonnie and Clyde at the TCM Movie DatabaseBonnie and Clyde at AllRoviBosley Crowthers original review, the New York Times, 14 April 1967, and his follow-up of 3 September 1967.Stephen Hunter, in Commentary, on the film's infidelity to historical truth about Barrow, Parker and Hamer.Literature on Bonnie and ClydeApocalypse Now is a 1979 American epic war film set during the Vietnam War, directed and produced by Francis Ford Coppola and starring Marlon Brando, Robert Duvall, and Martin Sheen. The film follows the central character, U.S. Army special operations officer Captain Benjamin L. Willard (Sheen), of MACV-SOG, on a mission to kill the renegade and presumed insane U.S. Army Special Forces Colonel Walter E. Kurtz (Brando).The screenplay by John Milius and Coppola came from Milius's idea of adapting Joseph Conrad's novella Heart of Darkness into the Vietnam War era. It also draws from Michael Herr's Dispatches,[2] the film version of Conrad's Lord Jim[citation needed] (which shares the same character of Marlow with Heart of Darkness), and Werner Herzog's Aguirre, the Wrath of God (1972).[3] The film drew attention for its lengthy and troubled production. Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker's Apocalypse documented Brando's showing up on the set overweight, Sheen's heart attack, and extreme weather destroying several expensive sets. The film's release was postponed several times while Coppola edited millions of feet of footage.On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, Apocalypse Now has a 99% "Certified Fresh" rating and was received with critical acclaim. Its cultural impact and its philosophical themes have been extensively discussed. Honored with the Palme d'Or at Cannes, and nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture and the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  Drama, the film was also deemed "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant" and selected for preservation by the National Film Registry in 2000.U.S. Army Captain and special operations veteran Benjamin L. Willard (Martin Sheen) has returned from action to Saigon where he drinks heavily and destroys his hotel room. Intelligence officers Lieutenant General Corman (G. D. Spradlin) and Colonel Lucas (Harrison Ford) approach him with an assignment: Willard must follow the Nung River into the remote Cambodian jungle, find rogue U.S. Army Special Forces Colonel Walter E. Kurtz (Marlon Brando) and kill him. Kurtz apparently went insane and now commands his own Montagnard troops inside neutral Cambodia.Willard joins a U.S. Navy PBR commanded by Chief Petty Officer George "Chief" Phillips (Albert Hall) and crewmen Lance Johnson (Sam Bottoms), Jay "Chef" Hicks (Frederic Forrest) and Tyrone "Mr. Clean" Miller (Laurence Fishburne). For escort they rendezvous with reckless Lieutenant Colonel Bill Kilgore (Robert Duvall), who commands a squadron of attack helicopters. Initially scoffing at them, Kilgore befriends Johnson as both are keen surfers. When Willard suggests the Viet Cong-filled coastal mouth of the Nung River, Kilgore accepts due to the surfing conditions there. After napalm strikes and Ride of the Valkyries playing over the chopper loudspeakers, the beach is taken and Kilgore orders others to surf it amid enemy fire. While Kilgore nostalgically regales everyone about a previous strike, Willard gathers his men to the PBR, which had been transported from a helicopter.Willard sifts through files of Kurtz, learning he was a model officer and possible future general, a top soldier in the field. Navigating upstream, the crew encounters a tiger and later visit a supply depot USO show featuring Playboy Playmates. The crew search a civilian sampan they come across, but Mr. Clean snaps and kills almost all on board, while Willard coldly shoots an injured survivor to prevent any delay of his mission. On reaching a US outpost at a bridge under constant attack, Willard is informed that a Captain Colby (Scott Glenn) was sent to find Kurtz, but is now missing. Lance and Chef are continually under the influence of drugs and Lance becomes withdrawn, smearing his face with camouflage paint.The next day the boat is fired upon by an unseen enemy in the trees, killing Mr. Clean and turning Chief hostile toward Willard. Later, they are ambushed again, by Montagnard warriors. They return fire and Chief is impaled with a spear, who then tries to kill Willard by pulling him onto it, but dies from his wound. Afterwards, Willard confides in the remaining Chef and Lance about his mission, and they reluctantly agree to continue upriver where they see the coastline is littered with bodies. Arriving at Kurtz's outpost, Willard takes Lance with him to the village, leaving Chef behind with orders to call an airstrike on the village if he does not return.In the camp, the two men are met by a manic freelance photographer (Dennis Hopper), who explains that Kurtz's great philosophical skills inspire his people to follow him. As they proceed, they see bodies and severed heads scattered about the nearby temple that serves as Kurtz's living quarters, and encounter the missing Captain Colby, who is nearly catatonic. Willard is brought before Kurtz in the darkened temple, where Kurtz derides him as an errand boy. Meanwhile Chef calls in the airstrike but is kidnapped. Bound to a post, Willard screams helplessly as Kurtz drops Chef's severed head into his lap. After some time, Willard is released and given the freedom of the compound. Kurtz lectures him on his theories of war, humanity and civilization while praising the ruthlessness and dedication of the Viet Cong. He asks Willard to tell his son everything about him in the event of his death.That night, as the villagers ceremonially slaughter a water buffalo, Willard enters Kurtz's chamber as Kurtz is making a recording, and attacks him with a machete. Lying mortally wounded on the ground, Kurtz whispers his final words "The horror ... the horror ..." before dying. Willard descends the stairs from Kurtz's chamber and drops his weapon. The villagers do likewise and allow Willard to take Lance by the hand and lead him to the boat. The two of them sail away as airstrikes are launched on the village and Kurtz's final words echo.[note 1]Several actors who were, or later became, prominent stars have minor roles in the movie including Harrison Ford, G. D. Spradlin, Scott Glenn, R. Lee Ermey and Laurence Fishburne. Fishburne was only fourteen years old when shooting began in March 1976, and he lied about his age in order to get cast in his role.[6] Apocalypse Now took so long to finish that Fishburne was seventeen (the same age as his character) by the time of its release.Although inspired by Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness, the film deviates extensively from its source material. The novella, based on Conrad's real experiences as a steam paddleboat captain in Africa, is set in the Congo Free State during the 19th century.[7] Kurtz and Marlow (who is named Willard in the movie) both work for a Belgian trading company that brutally exploits its native African workers.When Marlow arrives at Kurtz's outpost, he discovers that Kurtz has gone insane and is lording over a small tribe as a god. The novella ends with Kurtz dying on the trip back and the narrator musing about the darkness of the human psyche: "the heart of an immense darkness".In the novella, Marlow is the pilot of a river boat sent to collect ivory from Kurtz's outpost, only gradually becoming infatuated with Kurtz. In fact, when he discovers Kurtz in terrible health, Marlow makes an effort to bring him home safely. In the movie, Willard is an assassin dispatched to kill Kurtz. Nevertheless, the depiction of Kurtz as a god-like leader of a tribe of natives and his malarial fever, Kurtz's written exclamation "Exterminate the brutes!" (which appears in the film as "Drop the bomb. Exterminate them All!") and his last words "The horror! The horror!" are taken from Conrad's novella.Coppola argues that many episodes in the filmthe spear and arrow attack on the boat, for examplerespect the spirit of the novella and in particular its critique of the concepts of civilization and progress. Other episodes adapted by Coppola, the Playboy Playmates' (Sirens) exit, the lost souls, "taking me home" attempting to reach the boat and Kurtz's tribe of (white-faced) natives parting the canoes (gates of Hell) for Willard, (with Chef and Lance) to enter the camp are likened to Virgil and "The Inferno" (Divine Comedy) by Dante. While Coppola replaced European colonialism with American interventionism, the message of Conrad's book is still clear.[8]Coppola's interpretation of the iconic Kurtz character is often speculated to have been modeled after Tony Poe, a highly decorated Vietnam-era paramilitary officer from the CIA's Special Activities Division.[9] Poe's actions in Vietnam and in the 'Secret War' in neighbouring Laos, in particular his highly unorthodox and often savage methods of waging war show many similarities to those of the fictional Kurtz; for example, Poe was known to drop severed heads into enemy-controlled villages as a form of psychological warfare and use human ears to record the number of enemies his indigenous troops had killed. He would send these ears back to his superiors as proof of the efficacy of his operations deep inside Laos.[10][11] Coppola, however, denies that Poe was a primary influence and instead says the character was loosely based on Special Forces Colonel Robert B. Rheault, whose 1969 arrest over the murder of a suspected double agent Thai Khac Chuyen in Nha Trang generated substantial contemporary news coverage.[12]In the film, shortly before his death, Colonel Kurtz recites part of T.S. Eliot's poem "The Hollow Men". Not only is Kurtz in the novel characterized as "hollow at the core", the poem is preceded in printed editions by the epigraph "Mistah Kurtz he dead", a quotation from Conrad's Heart of Darkness which inspired the film.In addition, two books seen opened on Kurtz's desk in the film are From Ritual to Romance by Jessie Weston and The Golden Bough by Sir James Frazer, the two books that Eliot cited as the chief sources and inspiration for his poem "The Waste Land". Eliot's original epigraph for "The Waste Land" was this passage from Heart of Darkness, which ends with Kurtz's final words:[13]Did he live his life again in every detail of desire, temptation, and surrender during that supreme moment of complete knowledge? He cried in a whisper at some image, at some vision, he cried out twice, a cry that was no more than a breathWhen Willard is first introduced to Dennis Hopper's character, the photojournalist describes his own worth in relation to that of Kurtz with: "I should have been a pair of ragged claws/Scuttling across the floors of silent seas", from "The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock".While working as an assistant for Francis Ford Coppola on The Rain People, George Lucas and Steven Spielberg encouraged their friend and filmmaker John Milius to write a Vietnam War film.[14] Milius came up with the idea for adapting the plot of Joseph Conrad's Heart of Darkness to the Vietnam War setting.[15][note 2] Coppola gave Milius $15,000 to write the screenplay with the promise of an additional $10,000 if it were green-lit.[16] Milius claims that he wrote the screenplay in 1969[15] and originally called it The Psychedelic Soldier.[17] He wanted to use Conrad's novel as "a sort of allegory. It would have been too simple to have followed the book completely".[16] He based the character of Willard and some of Kurtz's on a friend of his, Fred Rexer, who had experienced, first-hand, the scene related by Marlon Brando's character wherein the arms of villagers are hacked off by the Viet Cong. At one point, Coppola told Milius, "Write every scene you ever wanted to go into that movie",[15] and he wrote ten drafts, amounting to over a thousand pages.[18] Milius changed the film's title to Apocalypse Now after being inspired by a button badge popular with hippies during the 1960s that said "Nirvana Now". He was also influenced by an article written by Michael Herr titled, "The Battle for Khe Sanh", which referred to drugs, rock 'n' roll, and people calling airstrikes down on themselves.[15]Milius had no desire to direct the film himself and felt that Lucas was the right person for the job.[15] Lucas worked with Milius for four years developing the film, alongside his work on other films, including his script for Star Wars.[19] He approached Apocalypse Now as a black comedy,[20] and intended to shoot the film after making THX 1138, with principal photography to start in 1971.[16] Lucas' friend and producer Gary Kurtz traveled to the Philippines, scouting suitable locations. They intended to shoot the film in both the rice fields between Stockton and Sacramento, California and on-location in Vietnam, on a $2 million budget, cinma vrit style, using 16 mm cameras, and real soldiers, while the war was still going on.[15][19][21] However, due to the studios' safety concerns and Lucas' involvement with American Graffiti and Star Wars, Lucas decided to shelve the project for the time being.[16][19]Coppola was drawn to Milius' script, which he described as "a comedy and a terrifying psychological horror story".[22] In the spring of 1974, Coppola discussed with friends and co-producers Fred Roos and Gary Frederickson the idea of producing the film.[23] He asked Lucas and then Milius to direct Apocalypse Now, but both men were involved with other projects;[23] in Lucas' case, he got the go-ahead to make Star Wars, and declined the offer to direct Apocalypse Now.[15] Coppola was determined to make the film and pressed ahead himself. He envisioned the film as a definitive statement on the nature of modern war, the difference between good and evil, and the impact of American society on the rest of the world. The director said that he wanted to take the audience "through an unprecedented experience of war and have them react as much as those who had gone through the war".[22]In 1975, while promoting The Godfather Part II in Australia, Coppola and his producers scouted possible locations for Apocalypse Now in Cairns in northern Queensland, that had jungle resembling Vietnam.[24] He decided to make his film in the Philippines for its access to American equipment and cheap labor. Production coordinator Fred Roos had already made two low-budget films there for Monte Hellman, and had friends and contacts in the country.[22] Coppola spent the last few months of 1975 revising Milius' script and negotiating with United Artists to secure financing for the production. According to Frederickson, the budget was estimated between $1214 million.[25] Coppola's American Zoetrope assembled $8 million from distributors outside the United States and $7.5 million from United Artists who assumed that the film would star Marlon Brando, Steve McQueen, and Gene Hackman.[22] Frederickson went to the Philippines and had dinner with President Ferdinand Marcos to formalize support for the production and to allow them to use some of the country's military equipment.[26]Steve McQueen was Coppola's first choice to play Willard, but the actor did not accept because he did not want to leave America for 17 weeks.[22] Al Pacino was also offered the role but he too did not want to be away for that long a period of time and was afraid of falling ill in the jungle as he had done in the Dominican Republic during the shooting of The Godfather Part II.[22] Jack Nicholson, Robert Redford, and James Caan were approached to play either Kurtz or Willard.[21]Coppola and Roos had been impressed by Martin Sheen's screen test for Michael in The Godfather and he became their top choice to play Willard, but the actor had already accepted another project and Harvey Keitel was cast in the role based on his work in Martin Scorsese's Mean Streets.[27] After the first week of shooting in the Philippines, Coppola replaced Keitel with Sheen. By early 1976, Coppola had persuaded Marlon Brando to play Kurtz for a then-enormous fee of $3.5 million for a month's work on location in September 1976. Dennis Hopper was cast as a kind of Green Beret sidekick for Kurtz and when Coppola heard him talking nonstop on location, he remembered putting "the cameras and the Montagnard shirt on him, and we shot the scene where he greets them on the boat".[21]On March 1, 1976, Coppola and his family flew to Manila and rented a large house there for the five-month shoot.[21] Sound and photographic equipment had been coming in from California on a regular basis since late 1975. Principal photography began three weeks later. Within a few days, Coppola was not happy with Harvey Keitel's take on Willard, saying that the actor "found it difficult to play him a passive onlooker".[21] After viewing early footage, the director took a plane back to Los Angeles and replaced Keitel with Martin Sheen.Typhoon Olga wrecked the sets at Iba and on May 26, 1976, production was closed down.[28] Dean Tavoularis remembers that it "started raining harder and harder until finally it was literally white outside, and all the trees were bent at forty-five degrees".[28] One part of the crew was stranded in a hotel and the others were in small houses that were immobilized by the storm. The Playboy Playmate set had been destroyed, ruining a month's shooting that had been scheduled. Most of the cast and crew went back to the United States for six to eight weeks. Tavoularis and his team stayed on to scout new locations and rebuild the Playmate set in a different place. Also, the production had bodyguards watching constantly at night and one day the entire payroll was stolen. According to Coppola's wife, Eleanor, the film was six weeks behind schedule and $2 million over budget.[28]Coppola flew back to the U.S. in June 1976. He read a book about Genghis Khan to get a better handle on the character of Kurtz.[28] After filming commenced, Marlon Brando arrived in Manila very overweight and began working with Coppola to rewrite the ending.[29] The director downplayed Brando's weight by dressing him in black, photographing only his face, and having another, taller actor double for him in an attempt to portray Kurtz as an almost mythical character.[29]In the days after Christmas 1976, Coppola viewed a rough assembly of the footage he had to date but still needed to improvise an ending. He returned to the Philippines in early 1977 and resumed filming.[29] On March 5, 1977, Sheen had a heart attack and struggled for a quarter of a mile to reach help.[30] He was back on the set on April 19. A major sequence in a French plantation cost hundreds of thousands of dollars but was cut from the final film. Rumors began to circulate that Apocalypse Now had several endings but Richard Beggs, who worked on the sound elements, said, "There were never five endings, but just the one, even if there were differently edited versions".[30] These rumors came from Coppola departing frequently from the original screenplay. Coppola admitted that he had no ending because Brando was too fat to play the scenes as written in the original script. With the help of Dennis Jakob, Coppola decided that the ending could be "the classic myth of the murderer who gets up the river, kills the king, and then himself becomes the king it's the Fisher King, from The Golden Bough".[30]A water buffalo was slaughtered with a machete for the climactic scene. The scene was inspired by a ritual performed by a local Ifugao tribe which Coppola had witnessed along with his wife (who filmed the ritual later shown in the documentary Hearts of Darkness) and film crew. Although this was an American production subject to American animal cruelty laws, scenes like this filmed in the Philippines were not policed or monitored, and the American Humane Association gave the film an "unacceptable" rating.[31] Principal photography ended on May 21, 1977 and everyone headed home.[32]In the summer of 1977, Coppola told Walter Murch that he had four months to assemble the sound. Murch realized that the script had been narrated but Coppola abandoned the idea during filming.[32] Murch thought that there was a way to assemble the film without narration but it would take ten months and decided to give it another try.[33] He put it back in, recording it all himself. By September, Coppola told his wife that he felt "there is only about a 20% chance [I] can pull the film off".[34] He convinced United Artists executives to delay the premiere from May to October 1978. Author Michael Herr received a call from Zoetrope in January 1978 and was asked to work on the film's narration based on his well-received book about Vietnam, Dispatches.[34] Herr said that the narration already written was "totally useless" and spent a year writing various narrations with Coppola giving him very definite guidelines.[34]Murch had problems trying to make a stereo soundtrack for Apocalypse Now because sound libraries were devoid of any stereo recordings of any weapons and, specifically, weapons used in Vietnam.[34] In addition, the sound material brought back from the Philippines was inadequate because the small location crew lacked time and resources sufficient to record jungle sounds and ambient noises. Murch and his crew had to fabricate the mood of the jungle on the soundtrack. Apocalypse Now would feature innovative sound technique for movies as Murch insisted on recording the most up-to-date gunfire and employed the Dolby Stereo 70 mm Six Track system for the 70mm release. This used two channels of sound from behind the audience as well as three channels of sound from behind the movie screen.[34] The 35mm release used the then still new Dolby Stereo optical stereo system that has a single surround channel and three screen channels.In May 1978, Coppola decided that it would not be possible to finish the film for a December release and postponed the opening until spring of 1979. He screened a "work in progress" for 900 people in April 1979 that was not well received.[35] That same year, he was invited to screen Apocalypse Now at the Cannes Film Festival.[36] United Artists were not keen on showing an unfinished version in front of so many members of the press but Coppola remembered that The Conversation won the Palme d'Or and agreed, less than a month prior to the start of the festival, to screen Apocalypse Now at Cannes. The week prior to Cannes, Coppola arranged three sneak previews that each featured their own slightly different versions. He allowed critics to attend the screenings and believed that they would honor the embargo placed on reviews. On May 14, Rona Barrett reviewed the film on television and called it "a disappointing failure".[36] At Cannes, Zoetrope technicians worked during the night before the screening to install additional speakers on the theater walls in order to achieve Murch's 5.1 soundtrack.[36] On August 15, 1979 Apocalypse Now was released in the U.S. in 15 theaters equipped to play the first Dolby Stereo 70mm film with stereo surround sound.At the time of its release, many rumors surrounded the ending of Apocalypse Now. Coppola stated an ending was written in haste in which Willard and Kurtz joined forces and repelled the air strike on the compound; however, Coppola never fully agreed with the two going out in apocalyptic intensity, preferring to end the film in a more encouraging manner.When Coppola originally organized the ending of the movie, he had two choices. One involved Willard leading Lance by the hand as everyone in Kurtz's base throws down their weapons, and ends with images of Willard's boat pulling away from Kurtz's compound superimposed over the face of a stone idol which then fades into black. Another option showed an air strike being called and the base being blown to bits in a spectacular display, consequently killing everyone left at the base.The original 1979 70mm exclusive theatrical release ended with Willard's boat, the stone statue, then fade to black with no credits, save for '"Copyright 1979 Omni Zoetrope"' right after the film ends. This mirrors the lack of any opening titles and supposedly stems from Coppola's original intention to "tour" the film as one would a play: the credits would have appeared on printed programs provided before the screening began.[37]There have been, to date, many variations of the end credit sequence, beginning with the 35mm general release version, where Coppola elected to show the credits superimposed over shots of Kurtz's base exploding.[37] Rental prints circulated with this ending, and can be found in the hands of a few collectors. Some versions of this had the subtitle "A United Artists release", while others had "An Omni Zoetrope release". The network television version of the credits ended with "...from MGM/UA Entertainment Company" (the film made its network debut shortly after the merger of MGM and UA). One variation of the end credits can be seen on both YouTube and as a supplement on the current Lionsgate Blu-ray.In any case, when Coppola heard that audiences interpreted this as an air strike called by Willard, Coppola pulled the film from its 35 mm run, and put credits on a black screen. (However, prints with the "air strike" footage continued to circulate to "repertory" theatres well into the 1980s.) In the DVD commentary, Coppola explains that the images of explosions had not been intended to be part of the story; they were intended to be seen as completely separate from the film. He had added them to the credits because he had captured the footage during the demolition of the sets (required by the Philippine government), which was filmed with multiple cameras fitted with different film stocks and lenses to capture the explosions at different speeds.In the Redux Version, Willard silences the radio as the PBR is pulling away from Kurtz's compound. It is unclear whether Willard then points the boat upstream or downstream. Just before fading to black, Kurtz's last words "the horror" are echoed and there is a brief glimpse of helicopters and napalm that harks back to the beginning of the film.There is a longer 289 minute version which has never been officially released but circulates as a video bootleg, containing extra material not included in either the original theatrical release or the "redux" version.[38]In 2001, Coppola released Apocalypse Now Redux in cinemas and subsequently on DVD. This is an extended version that restores 49 minutes of scenes cut from the original film. Coppola has continued to circulate the original version as well: the two versions are packaged together in the Complete Dossier DVD, released on August 15, 2006 and in the Blu-ray edition released on October 19, 2010.The longest section of added footage in the Redux version is a chapter involving the de Marais family's rubber plantation, a holdover from the colonization of French Indochina, featuring Coppola's two sons Gian-Carlo and Roman as children of the family. These scenes were removed from the 1979 cut, which premiered at Cannes. In behind-the-scenes footage in Hearts of Darkness, Coppola expresses his anger, on the set, at the technical aspects of the shot scenes, the result of tight allocation of resources. At the time of the Redux version, it was possible to digitally enhance the footage to accomplish Coppola's vision. In the scenes, the French family patriarchs argue about the positive side of colonialism in Indochina and denounce the betrayal of the military men in the First Indochina War. Hubert de Marais argues that French politicians sacrificed entire battalions at in Bin Ph, and tells Willard that the US created the Viet Cong (as the Viet Minh), to fend off Japanese invaders.Other added material includes extra combat footage before Willard meets Kilgore, a humorous scene in which Willard's team steals Kilgore's surfboard (which sheds some light on the hunt for the mangoes), a follow-up scene to the dance of the Playboy playmates, in which Willard's team finds the playmates awaiting evacuation after their helicopter has run out of fuel (trading two barrels of fuel for two hours with the Bunnies), and a scene of Kurtz reading from a Time magazine article about the war, surrounded by Cambodian children.There is a deleted scene titled "Monkey Sampan", which was used as a way to represent the whole movie in a three minute scene. The scene shows Willard and the PBR crew suspiciously eyeing an approaching sampan juxtaposed to Montagnard villagers joyfully singing "Light My Fire" by The Doors. As the sampan gets closer, Willard realizes there are monkeys on it and no helmsman. Finally, just as the two boats pass, the wind turns the sail and exposes a naked dead civilian tied to the sail boom. His body is mutilated and looks as though the man had been whipped. The singing stops. It is assumed the man was tortured by the Viet Cong. As they pass on by, Chief notes out loud, "That's comin' from where we're going, Captain." The boat then slowly passes the giant tail of a shot down B-52 bomber. The scene is ominous and the noise of engines way up in the sky is heard. Coppola said that he made up for cutting this scene by having the PBR pass under an airplane tail in the final cut.A three-hour version of Apocalypse Now was screened as a "work in progress" at the 1979 Cannes Film Festival and met with prolonged applause.[39] At the subsequent press conference, Coppola criticized the media for attacking him and the production during their problems filming in the Philippines and famously uttered, "We had access to too much money, too much equipment, and little by little we went insane", and "My film is not about Vietnam, it is Vietnam".[39] The filmmaker upset newspaper critic Rex Reed who reportedly stormed out of the conference. Apocalypse Now won the Palme d'Or for best film along with Volker Schlndorff's The Tin Drum - a decision that was reportedly greeted with "some boos and jeers from the audience".[40]Apocalypse Now performed well at the box office when it opened in August 1979.[39] The film initially opened in one theater in New York City, Toronto, and Hollywood, grossing USD $322,489 in the first five days. It ran exclusively in these three locations for four weeks before opening in an additional 12 theaters on October 3, 1979 and then several hundred the following week.[41] The film grossed over $78 million domestically with a worldwide total of approximately $150 million.[37]The film was re-released on August 28, 1987 in six cities to capitalize on the success of Platoon, Full Metal Jacket and other Vietnam War movies.[42] New 70mm prints were shown in Los Angeles, San Francisco, San Jose, Seattle, St. Louis, and Cincinnati cities where the film did financially well in 1979. The film was given the same kind of release as the exclusive engagement in 1979 with no logo or credits and audiences were given a printed program.[42]On the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes, Apocalypse Now has a 99% "Certified Fresh" rating, with an Average Rating of an 8.9/10. The Consensus is "Francis Ford Coppola's haunting, hallucinatory Vietnam war epic is cinema at its most audacious and visionary". In his original review, Roger Ebert wrote, "Apocalypse Now achieves greatness not by analyzing our 'experience in Vietnam', but by re-creating, in characters and images, something of that experience".[43] In his review for the Los Angeles Times, Charles Champlin wrote, "as a noble use of the medium and as a tireless expression of national anguish, it towers over everything that has been attempted by an American filmmaker in a very long time".[41]Ebert added Coppola's film to his list of Great Movies, stating: "Apocalypse Now is the best Vietnam film, one of the greatest of all films, because it pushes beyond the others, into the dark places of the soul. It is not about war so much as about how war reveals truths we would be happy never to discover".[44]Other reviews were less positive; Frank Rich in Time said "while much of the footage is breathtaking, Apocalypse Now is emotionally obtuse and intellectually empty".[45]Various commentators have debated whether Apocalypse Now is an anti-war or pro-war film. Some commentators' evidence of the film's anti-war message include the purposeless brutality of the war, the absence of military leadership, and the imagery of machinery destroying nature.[46] Advocates of the film's pro-war stance, however, view these same elements as a glorification of war and the assertion of American supremacy. According to Frank Tomasulo, the U.S. foisting its culture on Vietnam, including the destruction of a village so that soldiers could surf, affirms the film's pro-war message.[46] Additionally, a Marine named Anthony Swofford recounted how his platoon watched Apocalypse Now before being sent to Iraq in 1990 in order to get excited for war.[47] These anti-war and pro-war interpretations of the film imply, respectively, the understanding and misunderstanding of the film's irony. According to Coppola, the film may be considered anti-war, but is even more anti-lie: ...the fact that a culture can lie about what's really going on in warfare, that people are being brutalized, tortured, maimed, and killed, and somehow present this as moral is what horrifies me, and perpetuates the possibility of war.[48]In May 2011, a newly restored digital print of Apocalypse Now was released in UK cinemas, distributed by Optimum Releasing. Total Film magazine gave the film a five-star review, stating: "This is the original cut rather than the 2001 Redux (be gone, jarring French plantation interlude!), digitally restored to such heights you can, indeed, get a nose full of the napalm."[49]Today, the movie is widely regarded by many as a masterpiece of the New Hollywood era, and is frequently cited as one of the greatest films of all time.[50][51][52] Roger Ebert considers it to be the finest film on the Vietnam war and included it on his list for the 2002 Sight and Sound poll for the greatest movie of all time.[53][54] It is on the American Film Institute's 100 Years... 100 Movies list at number 28, but it dropped two spots to number 30 on their 10th anniversary list. Kilgore's quote "I love the smell of napalm in the morning" (written by Milius) was number 12 on the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes list and was also voted the fourth greatest movie speech of all time in a 2004 poll.[55] It is listed at number 7 on Empire's 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time. Entertainment Weekly ranked Apocalypse Now as having one of the "10 Best Surfing Scenes" in cinema.[56]In 1981, shortly after introduction of martial law in Poland, a British-Polish photographer Chris Niedenthal took an iconic photo presenting a SKOT APC in front of Moscow Cinema (Kino Moskwa) with the film's poster behind it.[57]In 2002, Sight and Sound magazine polled several critics to name the best film of the last 25 years and Apocalypse Now was named number one. It was also listed as the second best war film by viewers on Channel 4's 100 Greatest War Films and was the second rated war movie of all time based on the Movifone list (after Schindler's List) and the IMDB War movie list (after The Longest Day). It is ranked number 1 on Channel 4's 50 Films To See Before You Die. In a 2004 poll of UK film fans, Blockbuster listed Kilgore's eulogy to napalm as the best movie speech.[58] The helicopter attack scene with the Ride of the Valkyries soundtrack was chosen as the most memorable film scene ever by the Empire magazine (although the same track was used earlier in 1915 to similar effect in the score written to accompany the silent film The Birth of a Nation).In 2009, the London Film Critics' Circle voted Apocalypse Now the best movie of the last 30 years.[59]In 2011, actor Charlie Sheen, son of Martin Sheen, started playing clips from the film on his live tour and played the film in its entirety during post-show parties. One of Charlie Sheen's films, the 1993 comedy Hot Shots! Part Deux, includes a brief scene in which Charlie is riding a boat up a river in Iraq while on a rescue mission and passes Martin, as Captain Willard, going the other way. As they pass, each man shouts to the other "I loved you in Wall Street!", referencing the 1987 film that had featured both of them. Additionally, the promotional material for Hot Shots! Part Deux included a mockumentary that aired on HBO titled Hearts of Hot Shots! Part DeuxA Filmmaker's Apology, in parody of the 1991 documentary Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker's Apocalypse, about the making of Apocalypse Now.[60]WinsIn 2000, Apocalypse Now was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".NominationsAmerican Film Institute ListsMarlon Brando was also ranked #4 of the Top 25 American male screen legends.The first home video releases of Apocalypse Now were pan-and-scan versions of the original 35 mm Technovision anamorphic 2.35:1 print, and the closing credits, white on black background, were presented in compressed 1.33:1 full-frame format to allow all credit information to be seen on standard televisions. The first letterboxed appearance (on laserdisc on December 29, 1991) cropped the film to a 2:1 aspect ratio (conforming to the Univisium spec created by cinematographer Vittorio Storaro), featuring a small degree of pan-and-scan processing notably in the opening shots in Willard's hotel room, featuring a composite montage at the insistence of Coppola and Storaro. The end credits, from a videotape source rather than a film print, were still crushed for 1.33:1 and zoomed to fit the anamorphic video frame. All DVD releases have maintained this aspect ratio in anamorphic widescreen, but present the film without the end credits, which were treated as a separate feature. As a DVD extra, the footage of the explosion of the Kurtz compound was featured without text credits but included a commentary by director Coppola explaining the various endings based on how the film was screened. On the cover of the Redux DVD, Willard is erroneously listed as "Lieutenant Willard". The Blu-ray releases of Apocalypse Now restore the film to a 2.35:1 aspect ratio, making it the first home video release to display the film in effectively its true aspect ratio; the theatrical release had an aspect ratio of 2.39:1.Hearts of Darkness: A Filmmaker's Apocalypse (American Zoetrope/Cineplex-Odeon Films) (1991) Directed by Eleanor Coppola, George Hickenlooper & Fax BahrApocalypse Now - The Complete Dossier DVD (Paramount Home Entertainment) (2006) Disc 2 Extras include:The Post Production of Apocalypse Now: Documentary (four featurettes covering the editing, music and sound of the film through Coppola and his team) John MiliusFrancis Ford CoppolaMichael Herr (narration)Marlon BrandoRobert DuvallMartin SheenFrederic ForrestAlbert HallSam BottomsLaurence FishburneDennis HopperCarmine CoppolaFrancis Ford CoppolaRichard MarksWalter MurchGerald B. GreenbergLisa FruchtmanAugust 15, 1979(1979-08-15)1 Plot2 Cast3 Adaptation

3.1 Use of T.S. Eliot's poetry

3.1 Use of T.S. Eliot's poetry4 Development

4.1 Screenplay
4.2 Pre-production
4.3 Casting
4.4 Principal photography
4.5 Post-production

4.1 Screenplay4.2 Pre-production4.3 Casting4.4 Principal photography4.5 Post-production5 Other versions

5.1 Endings
5.2 Extended bootleg version
5.3 Apocalypse Now Redux

5.1 Endings5.2 Extended bootleg version5.3 Apocalypse Now Redux6 Reception

6.1 Cannes screening
6.2 Box office
6.3 Critical response
6.4 Legacy

6.1 Cannes screening6.2 Box office6.3 Critical response6.4 Legacy7 Awards and honors8 Home video release aspect ratio issues9 Documentaries10 See also11 Notes12 References13 External links3.1 Use of T.S. Eliot's poetry4.1 Screenplay4.2 Pre-production4.3 Casting4.4 Principal photography4.5 Post-production5.1 Endings5.2 Extended bootleg version5.3 Apocalypse Now Redux6.1 Cannes screening6.2 Box office6.3 Critical response6.4 LegacyMartin Sheen as Captain Benjamin L. Willard, a veteran U.S. Army special operations officer who has been serving in Vietnam for three years. The soldier who escorts him at the start of the film recites that Willard is from 505th Battalion, of the elite 173rd Airborne Brigade, assigned to MACV-SOG. It is later stated that he worked intelligence/counterintelligence for the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, carrying out secret operations and assassinations. An attempt to re-integrate into home-front society had apparently failed prior to the time at which the movie is set, and so he returns to the war-torn jungles of Vietnam, where he seems to feel more at home.Marlon Brando as Colonel Walter E. Kurtz, a highly decorated U.S. Army Special Forces with the 5th Special Forces Group who goes renegade. He runs his own operations out of Cambodia and is feared by the US military as much as the North Vietnamese and Vietcong.Robert Duvall as Lieutenant Colonel William "Bill" Kilgore, 1st Squadron, 9th Air Cavalry Regiment commander and surfing fanatic. Kilgore is a strong leader who loves his men dearly but has methods that appear out-of-tune with the setting of the war. His character is a composite of several characters including Colonel John B. Stockton, General James F. Hollingsworth (featured in The General Goes Zapping Charlie Cong by Nicholas Tomalin), George Patton IV, also a West Point officer whom Robert Duvall knew[4] and possibly Col. David Hackworth.[5]Frederic Forrest as Engineman 3rd Class Jay "Chef" Hicks, a tightly wound former chef from New Orleans who is horrified by his surroundings.Albert Hall as Chief Quartermaster George Phillips. The chief runs a tight ship and frequently clashes with Willard over authority. Has a father-son relationship with Clean.Sam Bottoms as Gunner's Mate 3rd Class Lance B. Johnson, a former professional surfer from California who spends the majority of the journey on a drug binge. After the scene at the bridge, his character does not speak for the remainder of the film (even as the final hit of acid should have worn off). He becomes entranced by the Montagnard tribe, even participating in the sacrifice ritual.Laurence Fishburne (credited as "Larry Fishburne") as Gunner's Mate 3rd Class Tyrone "Mr. Clean" Miller, the 17 year-old cocky South Bronx-born crewmember. He resents the inward nature of Willard.Dennis Hopper as an American photojournalist, a manic disciple of Kurtz who greets Willard. According to the DVD commentary of Redux, the character is based on Sean Flynn, a famed news correspondent who disappeared in Cambodia in 1970. His dialogue follows that of the Russian "harlequin" in Conrad's story.G.D. Spradlin as Lieutenant General Corman, military intelligence (G-2) an authoritarian officer who fears Kurtz and wants him removed.Jerry Ziesmer as a mysterious man (who is coincidentally addressed by General Corman as 'Jerry'; document visible on the Blu-ray version mentions a C.I.A. agent named R.E. Moore) in civilian attire who sits in on Willard's initial briefing. His only line in the film is the famous "Terminate with extreme prejudice".Harrison Ford as Colonel Lucas, aide to Corman and general information specialist. Despite his rank, he often appears nervous and jittery regarding Kurtz and the mission.Scott Glenn as Captain Richard M. Colby, previously assigned Willard's current mission before he defected to Kurtz's private army and sent a message to his wife telling her to sell everything they owned (but he goes on to tell her to sell their children, as well).Bill Graham as Agent (announcer and in charge of the Playmates' show)Cynthia Wood (1974 Playmate of the Year) as "Playmate of the Year"Linda (Beatty) Carpenter (August 1976 Playmate) as Playmate "Miss August"Colleen Camp as Playmate "Miss May"R. Lee Ermey as Helicopter PilotChristian Marquand as Hubert de Marais (Redux version), the surrogate leader of the French residents and strong vocal opponent of American action.Aurore Clment as Roxanne Sarraut-de Marais (Redux version), a widow and influential figure at the plantation.Roman Coppola as Francis de Marais (Redux version)Francis Ford Coppola (cameo) as a director filming beach combat; he shouts "Don't look at the camera, keep on fighting!" DP Vittorio Storaro plays the cameraman by Coppola's side.Academy Award for Best Cinematography (Vittorio Storaro)[61]Academy Award for Best Sound (Walter Murch, Mark Berger, Richard Beggs, Nathan Boxer)[61]Cannes Film Festival: Palme d'Or[62]Golden Globe Award for Best Director (Francis Ford Coppola)Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor (Robert Duvall)Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score (Carmine Coppola and Francis Ford Coppola)National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting Actor (Frederic Forrest)David di Donatello Award for Best Director, Foreign Film (Migliore Regista Straniero) (Francis Ford Coppola)American Movie Award for Best Supporting Actor (Robert Duvall)BAFTA Award for Best Direction (Francis Ford Coppola)BAFTA Award for Best Supporting Actor (Robert Duvall)Academy Award for Best Picture (Francis Ford Coppola, Fred Roos, Gray Frederickson and Tom Sternberg)[61]Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor (Robert Duvall)[61]Academy Award for Best Art Direction Set Decoration (Dean Tavoularis, Angelo P. Graham and George R. Nelson)[61]Academy Award for Directing (Francis Ford Coppola)[61]Academy Award for Film Editing (Richard Marks, Walter Murch, Gerald B. Greenberg and Lisa Fruchtman)[61]Academy Award for Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium (John Milius and Francis Ford Coppola)[61]DGA Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures (Francis Ford Coppola)WGA Award for Best Drama Written Directly for the Screen (John Milius and Francis Ford Coppola)Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  Drama (Francis Ford Coppola, Fred Roos, Gray Frederickson and Tom Sternberg)Grammy Award for Best Original Score Written for a Motion Picture (Carmine Coppola and Francis Ford Coppola)Csar Award for Best Foreign Film (Meilleur film tranger) (Francis Ford Coppola)American Movie Award for Best Actor (Martin Sheen)BAFTA Award for Best Film Music (Carmine Coppola and Francis Ford Coppola)BAFTA Award for Best Actor (Martin Sheen)AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #28AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Colonel Walter E. Kurtz - Nominated Villain

Colonel Walter E. Kurtz - Nominated VillainAFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs:

The End - Nominated

The End - NominatedAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"I love the smell of napalm in the morning." - #12

"I love the smell of napalm in the morning." - #12AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #30AFI's 10 Top 10 - Nominated Epic filmColonel Walter E. Kurtz - Nominated VillainThe End - Nominated"I love the smell of napalm in the morning." - #12"A Million Feet of Film: The Editing of Apocalypse Now" (18mins)"The Music of Apocalypse Now" (15mins)"Heard Any Good Movies Lately? The Sound Design of Apocalypse Now" (15mins)"The Final Mix" (3mins)Reflections in a Golden EyeCinema of the United StatesAnthony PoshepnyAdair, Gilbert (1981) Vietnam on Film: From The Green Berets to Apocalypse Now. Proteus. ISBN 0-906071-86-0Biskind, Peter (1999) Easy Riders, Raging Bulls: How the Sex, Drugs and Rock-'n'-Roll Generation Saved Hollywood. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 0-684-85708-1Coppola, Eleanor (1979) Notes on the Making of Apocalypse Now. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 0-87910-150-4Cowie, Peter (1990) Coppola. New York: Da Capo Press. ISBN 0-306-80598-7Cowie, Peter (2001) "The Apocalypse Now Book. New York: Da Capo Press.ISBN 10-03068-104-68Fraser, George MacDonald (1988) The Hollywood History of the World: from One Million Years B.C. to Apocalypse Now. Kobal Collection /Beech Tree Books. ISBN 0-688-07520-7French, Karl (1999) Karl French on Apocalypse Now: A Bloomsbury Movie Guide. Bloomsbury. ISBN 1-58234-014-5Milius, John & Coppola, Francis Ford (2001) Apocalypse Now Redux: An Original Screenplay. Talk Miramax Books/Hyperion. ISBN 0-7868-8745-1Tosi, Umberto & Glaser, Milton. (1979) Apocalypse Now - Program distributed in connection with the opening of the film. United ArtistsApocalypse Now at the Internet Movie DatabaseApocalypse Now at Rotten TomatoesApocalypse Now at MetacriticApocalypse Now at AllRoviApocalypse Now at Box Office MojoMr. Smith Goes to Washington is a 1939 American political drama film, starring Jean Arthur and James Stewart, about one man's effect on American politics. It was directed by Frank Capra and written by Sidney Buchman, based on Lewis R. Foster's unpublished story.[2] Mr. Smith Goes to Washington was controversial when it was released, but also successful at the box office, and made Stewart a major movie star.[3] The film features a bevy of well-known supporting actors and actresses, among them Claude Rains, Edward Arnold, Guy Kibbee, Thomas Mitchell and Beulah Bondi.Mr. Smith Goes to Washington was nominated for 11 Academy Awards, winning for Best Original Story.[4] In 1989, the Library of Congress added the movie to the United States National Film Registry, for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".The governor of an unnamed western state, Hubert "Happy" Hopper (Guy Kibbee), has to pick a replacement for recently deceased U.S. Senator Sam Foley. His corrupt political boss, Jim Taylor (Edward Arnold), pressures Hopper to choose his handpicked stooge, while popular committees want a reformer, Henry Hill. The governor's children want him to select Jefferson Smith (James Stewart), the head of the Boy Rangers. Unable to make up his mind between Taylor's stooge and the reformer, Hopper decides to flip a coin. When it lands on edge  and next to a newspaper story on one of Smith's accomplishments  he chooses Smith, calculating that his wholesome image will please the people while his navet will make him easy to manipulate.Junior Senator Smith is taken under the wing of the publicly esteemed, but secretly crooked, Senator Joseph Paine (Claude Rains), who was Smith's late father's oldest and best friend. Smith develops an immediate attraction to the senator's daughter, Susan (Astrid Allwyn). At Senator Paine's home, Smith has a conversation with Susan, fidgeting and bumbling, entranced by the young socialite. Smith's nave and honest nature allows the unforgiving Washington press to take advantage of him, quickly tarnishing Smith's reputation with ridiculous front page pictures and headlines branding him a bumpkin.To keep Smith busy, Paine suggests he propose a bill. With the help of his secretary, Clarissa Saunders (Jean Arthur), who was the aide to Smith's predecessor and had been around Washington and politics for years, Smith comes up with a bill to authorize a federal government loan to buy some land in his home state for a national boys' camp, to be paid back by youngsters across America. Donations pour in immediately. However, the proposed campsite is already part of a dam-building graft scheme included in an appropriations bill framed by the Taylor "political machine" and supported by Senator Paine.Unwilling to crucify the worshipful Smith so that their graft plan will go through, Paine tells Taylor he wants out, but Taylor reminds him that Paine is in power primarily through Taylor's influence. Through Paine, the machine in his state accuses Smith of trying to profit from his bill by producing fraudulent evidence that Smith already owns the land in question. Smith is too shocked by Paine's betrayal to defend himself, and runs away.Saunders, who looked down on Smith at first, but has come to believe in him, talks him into launching a filibuster to postpone the appropriations bill and prove his innocence on the Senate floor just before the vote to expel him. In his last chance to prove his innocence, he talks non-stop for about 24 hours, reaffirming the American ideals of freedom and disclosing the true motives of the dam scheme. Yet, none of the Senators are convinced. The constituents try to rally around him, but the entrenched opposition is too powerful, and all attempts are crushed. Owing to the influence of Taylor's machine, newspapers and radio stations in Smith's home state, on Taylor's orders, refuse to report what Smith has to say and even distort the facts against the senator. An effort by the Boy Rangers to spread the news in support of Smith results in vicious attacks on the children by Taylor's minions.Although all hope seems lost, the senators begin to pay attention as Smith approaches utter exhaustion. Paine has one last card up his sleeve: he brings in bins of letters and telegrams from Smith's home state, purportedly from average people demanding his expulsion. Nearly broken by the news, Smith finds a small ray of hope in a friendly smile from the President of the Senate (Harry Carey). Smith vows to press on until people believe him, but immediately collapses in a faint. Overcome with guilt, Paine leaves the Senate chamber and attempts to commit suicide by shooting himself. When he is stopped, he bursts back into the Senate chamber, loudly confessing to the whole scheme, and affirms Smith's innocence.Among unbilled veteran character actors seen in the film are Guy Kibbee's brother, Milton Kibbee, who has a bit as a reporter, Lafe McKee and Matt McHugh of the McHugh acting family. A number of the cast members and distinctive plot motifs would reappear in It's a Wonderful Life.Columbia Pictures originally purchased Lewis R. Foster's unpublished story, variously called The Gentleman from Montana and The Gentleman from Wyoming, as a vehicle for Ralph Bellamy, but once Frank Capra came on board as director after Rouben Mamoulian had expressed interest the film was to be a sequel to his Mr. Deeds Goes to Town, called Mr. Deeds Goes to Washington, with Gary Cooper reprising his role as Longfellow Deeds.[N 1]Because Cooper was unavailable, Capra then "saw it immediately as a vehicle for Jimmy Stewart and Jean Arthur",[5] and Stewart was borrowed from MGM.[2] Capra said of Stewart: ""I knew he would make a hell of a Mr. Smith... He looked like the country kid, the idealist. It was very close to him".[6]Although a youth group is featured in the story, the Boy Scouts of America refused to allow their name to be used in the film and instead the fanciful "Boy Rangers" was used.[2]In January 1938, both Paramount Pictures and MGM had submitted Foster's story to the censors at the Hays Office, probably indicating that both studios had interest in the project before Columbia purchased it. Joseph Breen, the head of that office, warned the studios: "[W]e would urge most earnestly that you take serious counsel before embarking on the production of any motion picture based on this story. It looks to us like one that might well be loaded with dynamite, both for the motion picture industry, and for the country at large." Breen specifically objected to "the generally unflattering portrayal of our system of Government, which might well lead to such a picture being considered, both here, and more particularly abroad, as a covert attack on the Democratic form of government". and warned that the film should make clear that "the Senate is made up of a group of fine, upstanding citizens, who labor long and tirelessly for the best interests of the nation..."Later, after the screenplay had been written and submitted, Breen reversed course, saying of the film that "It is a grand yarn that will do a great deal of good for all those who see it and, in my judgment, it is particularly fortunate that this kind of story is to be made at this time. Out of all Senator Jeff's difficulties there has been evolved the importance of a democracy and there is splendidly emphasized the rich and glorious heritage which is ours and which comes when you have a government 'of the people, by the people, and for the people'[2]".The film was in production from April 3, 1939 to July 7 of that year.[7] Some location shooting took place in Washington, DC, at Union Station and at the United States Capitol, as well as other locations for background use.[8][9]In the studio, to ensure authenticity, an elaborate set was created, consisting of Senate committee rooms, cloak rooms, hotel suites as well as specific Washington, DC monuments, all based on a trip Capra and his crew made to the capital. Even the Press Club of Washington was reproduced in minute detail,[2][10] but the major effort went into a faithful reproduction of the Senate Chamber on the Columbia lot. James D. Preston, a former superintendent of the Senate gallery, acted as technical director for the Senate set, as well as advising on political protocol. The production also utilized the "New York street set" on the Warner Bros. lot, using 1,000 extras when that scene was shot.[2]The ending of the film was apparently changed at some point, as the original program describes Stewart and Arthur returning to Mr. Smith's hometown, where they are met by a big parade, with the implication that they are married and starting a family.[2] In addition, the Taylor political machine was shown being crushed, Smith, riding a motorcycle, visits Senator Paine and forgives him, and a visit to Smith's mother. Some of this footage can be seen in the film's trailer.[11]When it was first released, the film premiered in Constitution Hall in Washington, D.C., on October 17, 1939, sponsored by the National Press Club, an event to which 4,000 guests were invited, including 45 senators.[6] Mr. Smith Goes to Washington was attacked by the Washington press, and politicians in the U.S. Congress, as anti-American and pro-Communist for its portrayal of corruption in the American government.[12] While Capra claims in his autobiography that some senators walked out of the premiere, contemporary press accounts are unclear about whether this occurred or not, or whether senators yelled back at the screen during the film.[13]It is known that Alben W. Barkley, a Democrat and the Senate Majority Leader, called the film silly and stupid, and said it makes the Senate look like a bunch of crooks.[14] He also remarked that the film was a grotesque distortion of the Senate, as grotesque as anything ever seen! Imagine the Vice President of the United States winking at a pretty girl in the gallery in order to encourage a filibuster! Barkley thought the film ...showed the Senate as the biggest aggregation of nincompoops on record![14]Pete Harrison, a respected journalist and publisher of the motion picture trade journal, Harrison's Reports, suggested that the Senate pass a bill allowing theater owners to refuse to show films that were not in the best interest of our country. That did not happen, but one of the ways that some senators attempted to retaliate for the damage they felt the film had done to the reputation of their institution was by pushing the passage of the Neely Anti-Block Booking Bill, which eventually led to the breakup of the studio-owned theater chains in the late 1940s. Columbia responded by distributing a program which put forward the films patriotism and support of democracy and publicized the films many positive reviews.[15]Other objections were voiced as well. Joseph P. Kennedy, the American Ambassador to Great Britain, wrote to Capra and Columbia head Harry Cohn to say that he feared the film would damage Americas prestige in Europe, and because of this urged that it be withdrawn from European release. Capra and Cohn responded, citing the films review, which mollified Kennedy to the extent that he never followed up, although he privately still had doubts about the film.[16]The film was banned in Hitler's Germany, Mussolini's Italy, Franco's Spain and Stalin's USSR.[17] According to Capra, the film was also dubbed in certain European countries to alter the message of the film so it conformed with official ideology.[17]When a ban on American films was imposed in German-occupied France in 1942, some theaters chose to show Mr. Smith Goes to Washington as the last movie before the ban went into effect. One theater owner in Paris reportedly screened the film nonstop for 30 days after the ban was announced.[18]The critical response to the film was more measured than the reaction by politicians, domestic and foreign. The critic for the New York Times, for instance, Frank S. Nugent, wrote that "[Capra] is operating, of course, under the protection of that unwritten clause in the Bill of Rights entitling every voting citizen to at least one free swing at the Senate. Mr. Capras swing is from the floor and in the best of humor; if it fails to rock the august body to its heels from laughter as much as from injured dignity it wont be his fault but the Senates, and we should really begin to worry about the upper house."[19]Mr. Smith Goes to Washington has been called one of the quintessential whistleblower films in American history. Dr. James Murtagh and Dr. Jeffrey Wigand cited this film as a seminal event in U.S. history at the first Whistleblower Week in Washington (May 1319, 2007).[20][21]The film has often been listed as among Capras best, but it has been noted that it marked a turning point in Capras vision of the world, from nervous optimism to a darker, more pessimistic tone. Beginning with American Madness in 1932, such Capra films as Lady for a Day, It Happened One Night, Mr. Deeds Goes to Town, and You Cant Take It With You had trumpeted their belief in the decency of the common man. In Mr. Smith Goes to Washington, however, the decent common man is surrounded by the most venal, petty, and thuggish group of yahoos ever to pass as decent society in a Capra movie. Everyone in the film  except for Jefferson Smith and his tiny cadre of believers  is either in the pay of the political machine run by Edward Arnolds James Taylor or complicit in Taylors corruption through their silence, and they all sit by as innocent people, including children, are brutalized and intimidated, rights are violated, and the government is brought to a halt.[22]Nevertheless, Smiths filibuster and the tacit encouragement of the Senate President are both emblematic of the director's belief in the difference that one individual can make. This theme would be expanded further in Capra's It's a Wonderful Life and other films.Mr. Smith Goes to Washington was nominated for 11 Academy Awards but only won one.[23]In 1949, Columbia planned, but never actually produced, a sequel to Mr. Smith Goes to Washington, called Mr. Smith Starts a Riot. They also considered doing a gender-reversed remake in 1952, with Jane Wyman playing the lead role.[2]A television series of the same name, Mr. Smith Goes to Washington, ran on ABC during the 19621963 season, starring Fess Parker, Sandra Warner and Red Foley. In 1977, producer Frank Capra, Jr. remade the film in 1977 as part of Tom Laughlin's Billy Jack series, Billy Jack Goes to Washington, but it was not a success. The film was also loosely remade as 1992's The Distinguished Gentleman, starring Eddie Murphy. The film's influence can be seen on many other films that deal with the United States Congress, including Legally Blonde 2: Red, White & Blonde and Evan Almighty. The short-lived 2003 NBC political drama Mister Sterling was described as "a Mr. Smith Goes to Washington for the 21st century", with the show centering on an idealistic young senator from California, getting to grips with Washington and appointed by a scheming, underhanded governor.[2]The VHS release of Ernest Rides Again featured the Saturday Night Live-based short "Mr. Bill Goes to Washington", a parody of Mr. Smith Goes to Washington.October 17, 1939(1939-10-17)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Impact5 Awards and nominations

5.1 Academy Awards
5.2 Other honors

5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Other honors6 Remakes7 See also8 References

8.1 Notes
8.2 Citations
8.3 Bibliography

8.1 Notes8.2 Citations8.3 Bibliography9 External links5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Other honors8.1 Notes8.2 Citations8.3 BibliographyJean Arthur as SaundersJames Stewart as Jefferson SmithClaude Rains as Senator Joseph PaineEdward Arnold as Jim TaylorGuy Kibbee as Governor HopperThomas Mitchell as "Diz" MooreEugene Pallette as Chick McGannBeulah Bondi as Ma SmithH. B. Warner as Senate Majority LeaderHarry Carey as President of the SenateAstrid Allwyn as Susan PaineRuth Donnelly as Mrs. HopperGrant Mitchell as Senator MacPhersonPorter Hall as Senator MonroePierre Watkin as Senate Minority LeaderCharles Lane as "Nosey"William Demarest as Bill GriffithDick Elliott as Carl CookBilly WatsonDelmar WatsonJohn RussellHarry WatsonGary WatsonBaby DumplingLarry Simms as The Hopper Boysand H. V. KaltenbornMr. Smith Goes to Washington was named as one of the best films of 1939 by the New York Times and Film Daily, and was nominated for Best Film by the National Board of Review.Jimmy Stewart won the 1939 New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor.In 1989, Mr. Smith Goes to Washington was added to the United States National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."[24]1998 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #292003 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Jefferson Smith, hero #11

Jefferson Smith, hero #112006 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers #52007 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #26Jefferson Smith, hero #11FilibusterMachine politicsPatriotismPolitical corruptionPolitics of the United StatesCapra, Frank. Frank Capra, The Name Above the Title: An Autobiography. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1971. ISBN 0-306-80771-8.Jones, Ken D., Arthur F. McClure and Alfred E. Twomey. The Films of James Stewart. New York: Castle Books, 1970.McBride, Joseph. Frank Capra: The Catastrophe of Success. New York: Touchstone Books, 1992. ISBN 0-671-79788-3.Michael, Paul, ed. The Great Movie Book: A Comprehensive Illustrated Reference Guide to the Best-loved Films of the Sound Era. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Inc., 1980. ISBN 0-13-363663-1.Rosales, Jean. DC Goes To The Movies: A Unique Guide To The Reel Washington. Bloomington, Indiana: IUniverse, 2003. ISBN 978-0-595-26797-2.Sennett, Ted. Hollywood's Golden Year, 1939: A Fiftieth Anniversary Celebration. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1989. ISBN 0-312-03361-3.Mr. Smith Goes to Washington siteMr. Smith Goes to Washington at the Internet Movie DatabaseMr. Smith Goes to Washington at the TCM Movie DatabaseMr. Smith Goes to Washington at AllRovi5 Speeches from the Movie in Text and Audio from AmericanRhetoric.comMr. Smith Goes to Washington ScriptFull length review of the filmThe Treasure of the Sierra Madre is a 1948 American film written and directed by John Huston, a feature film adaptation of B. Traven's 1927 novel of the same name, in which two impecunious Americans Fred C. Dobbs (Humphrey Bogart) and Bob Curtin (Tim Holt) during the 1920s in Mexico join with an old-timer, Howard (Walter Huston, the director's father), to prospect for gold. The old-timer accurately predicts trouble, but is willing to go anyway.The Treasure of the Sierra Madre was one of the first Hollywood films to be filmed almost entirely on location outside the United States (in the state of Durango and street scenes in Tampico, Mexico), although the night scenes were filmed back in the studio. The film is quite faithful to the novel. In 1990, this film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".[1]By the 1920s the violence of the Mexican Revolution had largely subsided, although scattered gangs of bandits continued to terrorize the countryside. The newly established post-revolution government relied on the effective, but ruthless, Federal Police, commonly known as the Federales, to patrol remote areas and dispose of the bandits. Foreigners, like the three U.S. prospectors who are the protagonists in the story, were at very real risk of being killed by the bandits if their paths crossed. The bandits, likewise, were given little more than a "last cigarette" by the army units after capture, even having to dig their own graves first.Dobbs (Humphrey Bogart) and Curtin (Tim Holt), cheated out of promised wages and down on their luck, meet old prospector Howard (Walter Huston) in the Mexican oil-town of Tampico. They set out to strike it rich in the remote Sierra Madre mountains, searching for gold.They ride a train into the hinterlands, surviving a bandit attack en route. In the desert, Howard proves to be the toughest and most knowledgeable; he is the one to discover the gold they seek. A mine is dug, and much gold is extracted. Greed soon sets in, and Dobbs begins to lose both his trust and his sanity, lusting to possess the entire treasure. Dobbs is also unreasonably afraid that he will be killed by his partners.A fourth American named James Cody (Bruce Bennett) appears, which sets up a moral debate about what to do with the new stranger. The men decide to kill Cody, but just as the three confront him with pistols and prepare to kill him, the bandits reappear, crudely pretending to be Federales. (This leads to a now-iconic line about not needing to show any "stinking badges.") After a gunfight with the bandits, in which Cody is killed, a real troop of Federales appears and chases away the bandits.Howard is called away to assist some local villagers in saving a little boy. The next day he is asked, without the option of declining, to go back to the village to be honored. However, he leaves his goods with Dobbs and Curtin. Dobbs, whose paranoia continues, and Curtin constantly argue, until one night when Curtin falls asleep, Dobbs holds him at gunpoint, takes him behind the camp, shoots him, grabs all three shares of the gold, and leaves him for dead. However, the wounded Curtin survives and manages to crawl away during the night.Dobbs is later ambushed and killed by some of the bandits. In their ignorance, the bandits believe Dobbs' bags of unrefined gold are merely filled with sand, and they scatter the gold to the winds. Curtin is discovered by indios and taken to Howard's village, where he recovers. He and Howard miss witnessing the bandits' execution by Federales by only a few minutes as they arrive back in town, and learn that the gold is gone.While checking the area where the bandits dropped the gold, Howard realizes that the winds must have carried the gold away. They accept the loss with equanimity, and then part ways, Howard returning to his village, and Curtin returning home to the United States.A few notable uncredited actors appear in the film. In an opening cameo, director John Huston is pestered for money by Bogart's character. Actor Robert Blake also appears as a young boy selling lottery tickets. However, the most controversial cameo is the rumored one by Ann Sheridan. Sheridan allegedly did a cameo as a streetwalker. After Dobbs leaves the barbershop in Tampico (actually a set on a studio soundstage), he spies a passing prostitute who returns his look. Seconds later, the woman is picked up again by the camera, but this time in the distance. Some filmgoers and critics feel the woman looks nothing like Sheridan, but the DVD commentary for the film contains a statement that it is she. A photograph included in the documentary accompanying the DVD release shows Sheridan in streetwalker costume, with Bogart and Huston on the set. However, single frames of the film show a different woman in a different dress and different hairstyle, raising the possibility that Sheridan filmed the sequence but that it was reshot with another woman for indeterminate reasons.[2] Many film-history sources credit Sheridan for the part.Co-star Tim Holt's father, Jack Holt, a star of silent and early sound Westerns and action films, makes a one-line appearance at the beginning of the film as one of the men down on their luck.Significant portions of the film's dialog are in unsubtitled Spanish.The opening scenes, filmed in longshot on the Plaza de la Libertad in Tampico, show modern (i.e. of the 1940s) cars and buses, even though the story opens in 1925, as evidenced by the lottery numbers poster.Dobbs is often used as a foil for Howard's philosophical comments on the value of gold and one's responsibilities to one's companions. For example, the Marxist exchange in the Oso Negro flophouse:Howard: Say, answer me this one, will you? Why is gold worth some twenty bucks an ounce?Dobbs: I don't know. Because it's scarce.Howard: A thousand men, say, go searchin' for gold. After six months, one of them's lucky: one out of a thousand. His find represents not only his own labor, but that of nine hundred and ninety-nine others to boot. That's six thousand months, five hundred years, scramblin' over a mountain, goin' hungry and thirsty. An ounce of gold, mister, is worth what it is because of the human labor that went into the findin' and the gettin' of it.Dobbs: I never thought of it just like that.Howard: Well, there's no other explanation, mister. Gold itself ain't good for nothing except making jewelry with and gold teeth.The film is the origin of a famous line, often misquoted as "We don't need no stinking badges!" (homaged in Mel Brooks' Blazing Saddles, also a Warner Bros. film). The correct dialogue is:In 2005, the quotation was chosen as No. 36 on the American Film Institute list, AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes.John Huston won the Academy Award for Directing and Academy Award for Writing Adapted Screenplay in 1948 for his work on The Treasure of the Sierra Madre. Walter Huston, John Huston's father, also won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role in this film, the first father-son win. The film was nominated for the Best Picture award, but lost to Laurence Olivier's film adaptation of Hamlet.In 1990, this film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". The film was among the first 100 films to be selected.[1]Director Stanley Kubrick listed The Treasure of Sierra Madre as his 4th favorite film of all time in his list of his top ten favorite films, director Sam Raimi ranked it as his favourite film of all time in an interview with Rotten Tomatoes and director Paul Thomas Anderson watched it at night before bed while writing his film There Will Be Blood.[3]January 6, 1948(1948-01-06)1 Background2 Plot3 Cast4 Production5 Philosophy6 Quotation7 Awards and honors8 References9 External linksHumphrey Bogart as Fred C. DobbsWalter Huston as HowardTim Holt as Bob CurtinBruce Bennett as James CodyBarton MacLane as Pat McCormickAlfonso Bedoya as Gold HatArturo Soto Rangel as El PresidenteManuel Dond as El JefeJos Torvay as PabloMargarito Luna as PanchoAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  No. 30AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills  No. 67AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Fred C. Dobbs  Nominated Villain[4]

Fred C. Dobbs  Nominated Villain[4]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Badges? We ain't got no badges! We don't need no badges! I don't have to show you any stinking badges!"  No. 36

"Badges? We ain't got no badges! We don't need no badges! I don't have to show you any stinking badges!"  No. 36AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  Nominated[5]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  No. 38Fred C. Dobbs  Nominated Villain[4]"Badges? We ain't got no badges! We don't need no badges! I don't have to show you any stinking badges!"  No. 36The Treasure of the Sierra Madre at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Treasure of the Sierra Madre at Rotten TomatoesThe Treasure of the Sierra Madre at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Treasure of Sierra Madre at AllRoviLiterature on The Treasure of the Sierra MadreThe Treasure of the Sierra Madre on Lux Radio Theater: April 18, 1949Annie Hall is a 1977 American romantic comedy directed by Woody Allen from his screenplay co-written with Marshall Brickman and produced by Charles H. Joffe. The director co-stars as Alvy Singer, who tries to figure out the reasons for the failure of his relationship with the film's eponymous female lead (Diane Keaton).Allen has described the film as "a major turning point",[2] which, unlike the farces and comedies that were his work to that point,[3] introduced a level of seriousness where, he says, he "had the courage to abandon ... just clowning around and the safety of complete broad comedy. I said to myself, 'I think I will try and make some deeper film and not be as funny in the same way. And maybe there will be other values that will emerge, that will be interesting or nourishing for the audience.'"[2]The film met widespread critical acclaim and, along with the 1978 Academy Award for Best Picture, won Oscars in three other categories: two for Allen (Best Director and, with Brickman, Best Original Screenplay), and Keaton for Best Actress. Its North American box office receipts of $38,251,425 are fourth-best in the director's oeuvre when not adjusted for inflation. Often listed among the greatest film comedies, it ranks 31st on AFI's list of the top feature films in American cinema, fourth on their list of top comedy films and number 28 on Bravo's "100 Funniest Movies." Film critic Roger Ebert calls it "just about everyone's favorite Woody Allen movie".[3]The comedian Alvy Singer (Woody Allen) is trying to understand why his relationship with Annie Hall (Diane Keaton) ended a year ago. Growing up in New York, he vexed his mother with impossible questions about the emptiness of existence, but he was precocious about his innocent sexual curiosity.While Annie and Alvy wait in a theater queue to watch The Sorrow and the Pity, another man loudly misinterprets the work of Marshall McLuhan. McLuhan himself steps in to correct the mistake. That night, Annie isnt interested in having sex with Alvy. Instead, they discuss his first wife, Allison Portchnik (Carol Kane), with whom there was little sexual pleasure. His second marriage was to a New York intellectual, but their sexual relationship was not enjoyable for him. With Annie, it is different. The two of them have uproarious fun making a meal of boiled lobster together. Alvy enjoys mocking the unusual men that Annie had been involved with.Alvy met Annie on the tennis court. After the game, their awkward small talk led her to offer him first a ride up town and then a glass of wine on her balcony. There, what seemed a mild exchange of trivial personal data is revealed in "mental subtitles" as an escalating flirtation. Their first date follows Annies singing audition for a night club (It Had to be You). He suggests they kiss first thing to get it out of the way. After their lovemaking that night, Alvy is "a wreck", while she relaxes with a joint.Soon Annie admits she loves him, and he buys her books on death and says that his feelings for her are more than just love. When she moves in with him, things get very tense. Alvy feels strange when they visit her family in Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin, for Easter. He claims to have never felt more Jewish than with her Jew-hating grandmother, and his imagined conversation between their two families reveals a gulf in style, substance, and background. Finding her arm in arm with one of her college professors, Alvy argues with Annie whether this is the "flexibility" they had discussed. He searches for the truth of relationships, asking strangers on the street about the nature of love, questioning his formative years, until he becomes an animated Snow White to Annies evil queen. The love is gone.Alvy returns to dating, but the effort is marred by neurosis, bad sex, and finally an interruption from Annie, who insists he come over immediately. It turns out she needs him to kill a spider. A reconciliation follows, coupled with a vow to stay together come what may. However, their separate discussions with their therapists make it evident there is an unspoken divide. When Alvy accepts an offer to present an award on television, they fly out to Los Angeles, but on the return they agree that its not working. After losing her to her record producer, Tony Lacey (Paul Simon), he unsuccessfully tries rekindling the flame with a marriage proposal. Back in New York, he stages a play of this episode but changes the ending: now she accepts.The last meeting for them is a wistful coda on New York's Upper West Side when they have both moved on to someone new. Alvys voice returns with a summation: love is essential, especially if it's neurotic. Annie torches "Seems Like Old Times" and the credits roll.Several personal references in the film have invited speculation that it is autobiographical for the director. Both Alvy and Allen were comedians. His birthday appears on the blackboard in a school scene,[4] certain features of his childhood are found in Alvy Singer's,[5] Allen went to New York University and so did Alvy. Diane Keaton's real surname is "Hall" and "Annie" was her nickname, and she and Allen were once romantically involved.[6] There is an ambiguous allusion to Keaton's feature roles in the first two films of The Godfather trilogy. However, Allen is quick to dispel these suggestions. "The stuff that people insist is autobiographical is almost invariably not," Allen said. "It's so exaggerated that it's virtually meaningless to the people upon whom these little nuances are based. People got it into their heads that Annie Hall was autobiographical, and I couldn't convince them it wasn't".[7] Contrary to various interviewers and commentators, he says, Alvy is not the character that is closest to himself; he identified more with the mother (Eve, played by Geraldine Page) in his next film, Interiors.[8] Despite this, Keaton has stated that the relationship between Alvy and Annie was partly based on her relationship with the director.[9]The role of Annie Hall was written specifically for Keaton, who had worked with Allen on Play it Again, Sam, Sleeper and Love and Death.[9] She considered the character an "affable version" of herselfboth were "semi-articulate, dreamed of being a singer and suffered from insecurity"and was surprised to win an Oscar for her performance.[9]Federico Fellini was Allen's first choice to appear in the cinema lobby scene because his films were under discussion,[10] but Allen chose cultural academic Marshall McLuhan after both Fellini and Luis Buuel declined the cameo.[11]Some cast members, Baxter claims, were aggrieved at Allen's treatment of them. The director "acted coldly" towards McLuhan, who had to return from Canada for reshooting, and Mordecai Lawner, who played Alvy's father, claimed that Allen never spoke to him.[11] However, during the production, Allen began a two-year relationship with Stacey Nelkin, who appears in a single scene.[11]The idea for what would become Annie Hall was developed as Allen walked around New York with co-writer Marshall Brickman. The pair discussed the project on alternate days, sometimes becoming frustrated and rejecting the idea. Allen wrote a first draft of a screenplay within a four day period, sending it to Brickman to make alterations. According to Brickman, this draft centered on a man in his forties, someone whose life consisted "of several strands. One was a relationship with a young woman, another was a concern about the banality of life we all live, and a third an obsession with proving himself and testing himself to find out what kind of character he had."[12]Allen had himself turned forty in 1975. Brickman suggests that his "advancing age" and "worries about his death" had influenced Allen's philosophical, personal approach to complement his "commercial side".[12] Allen said that he had decided to "sacrifice some of the laughs for a story about human beings".[13] He was also influenced by Federico Fellini's 1963 comedy-drama 8, which the Italian director had created at a similar turning point, and for both of which their director's psychoanalysis play a part.[14] The pair sent the screenplay back and forth between them until they were ready to ask United Artists for $4 million.[14]Many elements from the early drafts did not survive. It was originally a drama centered on a murder mystery with a comic and romantic subplot.[15] According to Allen, the murder occurred after a scene that remains in the film, the sequence in which Annie and Alvy miss the Ingmar Bergman film Face to Face.[10] Although they decided to drop the murder plot, Allen and Brickman made a murder mystery many years later: 1993's Manhattan Murder Mystery, also starring Diane Keaton. The draft that Allen presented to the film's editor, Ralph Rosenblum, concluded with the words, "ending to be shot." It was "like a first draft of a novel ... from which two or three films could possibly be assembled," Rosenblum says.[16]Allen's working title for the film was "Anhedonia", a term for the inability to experience pleasure.[17][18] However, United Artists considered this unmarketable, as were Brickman's suggested alternatives: "It Had to Be Jew", "Rollercoaster Named Desire" and "Me and My Goy".[19] An advertising agency, hired by UA, embraced Allen's choice of an obscure word by suggesting advertising in tabloid newspapers using vague slogans such as "Anhedonia Strikes Cleveland".[19] However, Allen tried several titles over five test screenings, including "Anxiety" and "Alvy and Me", before settling on "Annie Hall".[19]Principal photography began on 19 May 1976 on the South Fork of Long Island with the scene in which Alvy and Annie boil live lobsters; filming continued periodically for the next ten months.[20] The production deviated from the screenplay. There was nothing written about Alvy's childhood home lying under a roller coaster, but when Allen was scouting locations in Brooklyn with Willis and art director Mel Bourne, he "saw this roller-coaster, and... saw the house under it. And I thought, we have to use this."[5] In a similar vein, there is the incident where Alvy scatters a trove of cocaine with an accidental sneeze: although not in the script, the joke emerged from a rehearsal happenstance and stayed in the movie. In audience testing, this laugh was so big that a re-edit had to add a hold so that the following dialogue was not lost.[21]Rosenblum's first assembly of the film in 1976 left Brickman disappointed. At two hours and twenty minutes, Annie Hall herself was less prominent, and it dwelt "on issues just touched in passing in the version we know",[16] featuring the "surrealistic and abstract adventures of a neurotic Jewish comedian who was reliving his highly flawed life and in the process satirizing much of our culture,... a visual monologue, a more sophisticated and visual version of Take the Money and Run".[22] Brickman found it "nondramatic and ultimately uninteresting, a kind of cerebral exercise."[16] He suggested a more linear narrative.[23]Fortunately, the shooting schedule was budgeted for two weeks of post-production photography,[24] so even though the first cut had "some of the free-est, funniest and most sophisticated material that Woody had ever created, and it hurt him to lose it",[22] late 1976 saw three separate shoots for the final segment, two of which appear in some form. One featured Annie Hall taking her new boyfriend to The Sorrow and the Pity, which she had reluctantly seen with Alvy; the other, Alvy's monologue featuring the joke about 'we all need the eggs', was conceived during a cab journey to an early preview.[25]The title sequence of Annie Hall features a black background with white text in the Windsor Light Condensed typeface, a design that Allen would use on his subsequent films and become a trademark of his. Stig Bjrkman sees some similarity to Ingmar Bergman's simple and consistent title design, although Allen says that his own choice is a cost-saving device.[26]Very little background music is heard in the film, a departure for Allen influenced by Ingmar Bergman.[26] Diane Keaton performs twice in the jazz club: "It Had to be You" and "Seems Like Old Times" (the latter reprises in voiceover on the closing scene). The other exceptions include a boy's choir "Christmas Medley" played while the characters drive through Los Angeles, the Molto allegro from Mozart's Jupiter Symphony (heard as Annie and Alvy drive through the countryside), Tommy Dorsey's performance of "Sleepy Lagoon",[27] and the muzak version of the Savoy Brown song "A Hard Way to Go", playing over a party in the mansion of Paul Simon's character.Technically, the film marked an advance for the director. He selected Gordon Willis as his cinematographerfor Allen "a very important teacher" and a "technical wizard," saying, "I really count Annie Hall as the first step toward maturity in some way in making films."[28] At the time, it was considered an "odd pairing" by many, Keaton among them, for Willis and Allen to work together. The director was famous for "laugh machines"[29] and hilarious farces, while Willis was known as "the prince of darkness" for work on dramatic films like The Godfather.[13] Despite this, the two became friends during filming and continued the collaboration on several later films, including Zelig, which earned Willis his first Academy Award nomination for Best Cinematography.[13]Willis described the production for the film as "relatively easy".[13] He shot in varying styles; "hot golden light for California, grey overcast for Manhattan and a forties Hollywood glossy for... dream sequences", most of which were cut.[30] It was his suggestion which led Allen to film the dual therapy scenes in one set divided by a wall instead of the usual split screen method.[13] He tried long takes, with some shots, unabridged, lasting an entire scene, which, for Ebert, add to the dramatic power of the film: "Few viewers probably notice how much of Annie Hall consists of people talking, simply talking. They walk and talk, sit and talk, go to shrinks, go to lunch, make love and talk, talk to the camera, or launch into inspired monologues like Annie's free-association as she describes her family to Alvy. This speech by Diane Keaton is as close to perfect as such a speech can likely be ... all done in one take of brilliant brinksmanship." He cites a study that calculated the average shot length of Annie Hall to be 14.5 seconds, while other films made in 1977 had an average shot length of 47 seconds.[3] Peter Cowie suggests that "Allen breaks up his extended shots with more orthodox cutting back and forth in conversation pieces, so that the forward momentum of the film is sustained."[31]Other techniques reflect Allen's artistic influences. The main characters' visit to Alvys childhood echo Ingmar Bergman's Wild Strawberries and the school scenes are reminiscent of Federico Fellini's later work.[29] The Jewish humorparticularly the character of the oversexed Jewish mandraws on Philip Roth's novel Portnoy's Complaint.[32]Although the film is not essentially experimental, at several points it undermines the narrative reality. In one famous scene, Allen's character, in line to see a movie with Annie, listens to a man behind him deliver misinformed pontifications on the significance of Fellini and Marshall McLuhan's work. Allen pulls McLuhan himself from just off camera to personally correct the man's errors.[3] Later in the film, when we see Annie and Alvy in their first extended talk, "mental subtitles" convey to the audience the characters' nervous inner doubts.[3] An animated scenewith artwork based on the comic strip Inside Woody Allen -- depicts Alvy and Annie in the guise of the Wicked Queen from Snow White.[3]Although Allen uses each of these techniques only once, the "fourth wall" is broken several other times when characters address the camera directly. In one, Alvy stops several passers-by to ask questions about love, and in another he shrugs off writing a happy ending to his relationship with Annie in his autobiographical first play as forgivable "wish-fulfillment." Allen chose to have Alvy break the fourth wall, he explained, "because I felt many of the people in the audience had the same feelings and the same problems. I wanted to talk to them directly and confront them."[28]The nature of love is a repeating subject for Allen and in this film, which co-star Tony Roberts described as "the story of everybody who falls in love, and then falls out of love and goes on."[13] Alvy's search for love's purpose comes through his effort to get over his depression about the demise of his relationship with Annie. Sometimes he sifts through his memories of the relationship,[33] at another point he stops people on the sidewalk, with one woman saying that "Its never something you do. Thats how people are. Love fades," a suggestion that it was no one's fault, they just grew apart and the end was inevitable.[34] By the end of the film, Alvy accepts this and decides that love is ultimately "irrational and crazy and absurd", but a necessity of life.[33][34]Alvy Singer is identified with the stereotypical neurotic Jewish male, and the differences between Alvy and Annie are often related to the perceptions and realities of Jewish identity. Vincent Brook notes that Alvy dines with WASP-y Hall family and imagines that they must see him as a Hasidic Jew, complete with payess (ear locks) and a large black hat.[35]Annie Hall, the film, "is as much a love song to New York City as it is to the character,"[33] reflecting Allen's adoration of the island of Manhattan. It was a relationship he explored repeatedly, particularly in films like Manhattan (1979) and Hannah and Her Sisters (1986).[13] Peter Cowie argues that the film shows "a romanticized view" of the borough, with the camera "linger[ing] on the Upper East Side [... and where] the fear of crime does not trouble its characters."[36] By contrast, California is presented less positively. While Manhattan's movie theaters show classic and foreign films, Los Angeles theaters run less-prestigious fare such as House of Exorcism and Messiah of Evil.[36] Rob's demonstration of adding canned laughter to television demonstrates the "cynical artifice of the medium".[36] New York serves as a symbol of Alvy's personality ("gloomy, claustrophobic, and socially cold, but also an intellectual haven full of nervous energy") while Los Angeles is a symbol of freedom for Annie.[33]The film was first screened at the Los Angeles Film Festival in March 1977.[17] The film later received an official release date on April 20, 1977.[1] It ultimately earned $38,251,425 in the United States against a $4-million budget, making the film the 11th highest-grossing picture of that year.[1] It currently ranks as Allen's fourth-highest-grossing film, after his later efforts: Manhattan, Hannah and Her Sisters and Midnight in Paris,[37] and, when adjusted for inflation, it grossed $135,852,600, making it Allen's biggest box office hit.[37]Annie Hall met with widespread critical acclaim upon its release. Tim Radford of The Guardian called the film "Allen's most closely focused and daring film to date".[38] The New York Times' Vincent Canby preferred Annie Hall to Allen's second directorial effort, Take the Money and Run, since the former is more "humane" while the latter is more a "cartoon".[39] Several critics have compared the film favorably to Bergman's 1973 film, Scenes from a Marriage,[29][40][39] including Joseph McBride in Variety, who found it Allen's "most three-dimensional film to date" with an ambition equal to Bergman's best even as the co-stars become the "contemporary equivalent of... Tracy-Hepburn."[29] More critically, Peter Cowie commented that the film "suffers from its profusion of cultural references and asides".[41]After more than a quarter century, the film has continued to receive positive reviews. In his 2002 lookback, Roger Ebert noted with surprise that the film had "an instant familiarity" despite its age,[3] and Slant writer Jaime N. Christley found the one-liners "still gut-busting after 35 years".[40] Another Guardian critic, Peter Bradshaw, named it the best comedy film of all time, commenting that "this wonderfully funny, unbearably sad film is a miracle of comic writing and inspired film-making".[42] Empire magazine rated the movie five out of five stars, calling it a "classic".[43] To date, all of the 53 reviews tabulated at Rotten Tomatoes have approved of the film with only one exception, for a score of 98%. Its average rating is 8.8 on a scale of 10. [44]In his discussion of the film's relation to modernism, Thomas Schatz finds the film an unresolved "examination of the process of human interaction and interpersonal communication"[45] and immediately establishes [a] self-referential stance that invites the spectator to read the narrative as something other than a sequential development toward some transcendent truth. [46] For him, Alvy "is the victim of a tendency toward overdetermination of meaning -- or in modernist terms 'the tyranny of the signified' -- and his involvement with Annie can be viewed as an attempt to establish a spontaneous, intellectually unencumbered relationship, an attempt which is doomed to failure."[45]Christopher Knight points out that Annie Hall is framed through Alvy's experiences. "Generally, what we know about Annie and about the relationship comes filtered through Alvy, an intrusive narrator capable of halting the narrative and stepping out from it in order to entreat the audience's interpretative favor."[47] He suggests that because Allen's films blur the protagonist with "past and future protagonists as well as with the director himself", it "makes a difference as to whether we are most responsive to the director's or the character's framing of events".[48] Knight believes Alvy's quest upon meeting Annie is carnal, whereas hers is on an emotional note.[49] Despite the narrative's framing, "the joke is on Alvy."[50]Annie Hall won four Oscars at the 50th Academy Awards on April 3, 1978. Producer Charles H. Joffe received the statue for Best Picture, Allen for Best Director and, with Brickman, for Best Original Screenplay, and Keaton for Best Actress. Allen was also nominated for Best Actor.[51] Many had expected Star Wars to win the major awards, including Brickman and Executive Producer Robert Greenhut.[13]The film was also honored four times at the BAFTA awards. Along with the top award for Best Film, Keaton won for Best Actress, Allen won for Best Direction and Best Original Screenplay alongside Brickman.[52] The film received only one Golden Globe Award, for Best Film Actress in a Musical or Comedy (Diane Keaton).[53] despite nominations for three other awards: Best Motion Picture (Musical or Comedy), Best Director, and Best Film Actor in a Musical or Comedy (Woody Allen).[53]In 1992, the United States' Library of Congress selected the film for preservation in its National Film Registry that includes "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" films.[54] It's often mentioned among the greatest comedies of all time. The American Film Institute lists it 31st in American cinema history.[55] The screenplay was named the sixth greatest screenplay by the Writers Guild of America, West[56] while IGN named it the seventh greatest comedy film of all time.[57] In 2000, readers of Total Film magazine voted it the forty-second greatest comedy film of all time, and the seventh greatest romantic comedy film of all time.[58] Several lists ranking Allen's best films have put Annie Hall among his greatest work.[59][60][61][62]In June 2008, AFI revealed its Ten top Tenthe best ten films in ten classic American film genresafter polling over 1,500 people from the creative community and Annie Hall place second in the romantic comedy genre.[63] In November 2008, Annie Hall was voted in at No. 68 on Empire magazine's list of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time.[64] It is also ranked #2 on Rotten Tomatoes' 25 Best Romantic Comedies, second only to The Philadelphia Story.[65] In 2012, the film was listed as the 127th best film of all time by Sight & Sound critics' poll.[66] The film was also named the 132nd best film by the Sight & Sound directors' poll.[66]
American Film Institute recognitionAlthough the film received critical acclaim and several awards, Allen himself was disappointed with it, and said in an interview, "When Annie Hall started out, that film was not supposed to be what I wound up with. The film was supposed to be what happens in a guys mind.... Nobody understood anything that went on. The relationship between myself and Diane Keaton was all anyone cared about. That was not what I cared about.... In the end, I had to reduce the film to just me and Diane Keaton, and that relationship, so I was quite disappointed in that movie".[67]He says he has repeatedly declined to make a sequel,[68] admitting in a 1992 interview that for a time he considered it:The film also had an influence on the fashion world during the late-70s, with many women adopting Keaton's distinctive look, layering oversized, mannish blazers over vests, billowy trousers or long skirts, a man's tie by Ralph Lauren, and boots. The look was often referred to as the "Annie Hall look".[70] Allen recalled that Keaton's natural fashion sense (the outfits that Keaton wore in the film were her own clothes) almost did not end up in the film. "She came in," he recalled in 1992, "and the costume lady on Annie Hall said, 'Tell her not to wear that. She can't wear that. It's so crazy.' And I said, 'Leave her. She's a genius. Let's just leave her alone, let her wear what she wants.'"[71]Since its release, other romantic comedies have inspired comparison. When Harry Met Sally..., Chasing Amy, (500) Days of Summer and Allen's 2003 film, Anything Else are among them,[66][72][73][74][75] while film director Rian Johnson said in an interview for the book, The Film That Changed My Life, that Annie Hall inspired him to become a film director.[76]Annie Hall was first released on Blu-ray on January 24, 2012 alongside Allen's 1979 film Manhattan.[77] Both releases included the films original theatrical trailer.[77]April 20, 1977(1977-04-20)1 Plot2 Cast3 Writing4 Production

4.1 Music

4.1 Music5 Style and technique6 Themes7 Release

7.1 Box office
7.2 Critical reviews
7.3 Scholarly criticism
7.4 Accolades
7.5 Legacy and influence

7.1 Box office7.2 Critical reviews7.3 Scholarly criticism7.4 Accolades7.5 Legacy and influence8 Home release9 References10 Bibliography11 External links4.1 Music7.1 Box office7.2 Critical reviews7.3 Scholarly criticism7.4 Accolades7.5 Legacy and influenceWoody Allen as Alvy SingerDiane Keaton as Annie HallTony Roberts as RobCarol Kane as Allison PortchnikPaul Simon as Tony LaceyShelley Duvall as PamJanet Margolin as RobinColleen Dewhurst as Mrs. HallChristopher Walken as Duane HallJeff Goldblum as LA party guy on phoneSigourney Weaver as Alvy's date outside theaterBeverly D'Angelo as Actress in Rob's TV ShowTracey Walter as Actor in Rob's TV ShowShelley Hack as Street Stranger (as Shelly Hack)John Glover as Annie's actor ex-boyfriendTruman Capote (uncredited) as Winner of the Truman Capote Lookalike ContestMarshall McLuhan as Himself (Cameo)Laurie Bird as Tony Lacey's girlfriendMark Lenard as Navy OfficerDick Cavett as Himself1998: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #312000: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs - #42002: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions - #112004: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs - #90

"Seems Like Old Times"

"Seems Like Old Times"2005: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes - #55

"La-dee-da, la-dee-da."

"La-dee-da, la-dee-da."2007: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #352008: AFI's 10 Top 10 - #2 romantic comedy"Seems Like Old Times""La-dee-da, la-dee-da."Baxter, John (1999). Woody Allen: A Biography (Revised paperback ed.). London: Harper Collins. ISBN0-00-638794-2.Bjrkman, Stig (1995) [1993]. Woody Allen on Woody Allen. London: Faber and Faber. ISBN0-571-17335-7.Brook, Vincent (2006). You Should See Yourself: Jewish Identity in Postmodern Jewish Culture. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.Cowie, Peter (1996). Annie Hall. London: British Film Institute. ISBN0-85170-580-4.Girgus, Sam B. (1993). "Philip Roth and Woody Allen: Freud and the Humor of the Repressed". In Ziv, Avner; Zajdman, Anat. Semites and stereotypes: characteristics of Jewish humor. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN0-313-26135-0.Johnson, Rian (2011). "Annie Hall (Interview by Robert K. Elder.)". In Robert K. Elder. The Film That Changed My Life. Chicago: Chicago Review Press. ISBN1556528256.Knight, Christopher J (2004). "Woody Allen's Annie Hall: Galatea's Triumph Over Pygmalion". Literature/Film Quarterly 32 (3): 213-221.Lax, Eric (2000). Woody Allen: A Biography (New ed.). Da Capo Press. ISBN0-306-80985-0.Rosenblum, Ralph; Karen, Robert (1986). When the Shooting Stops... The Cutting Begins. DaCapo Press. ISBN0-306-80272-4.Schatz, Thomas (1982). "Annie Hall and the Issue of Modernism". Literature/Film Quarterly 10 (3): 180-187.Spignesi, Stephen J. (1992). The Woody Allen Companion. London: Plexus Publishing. ISBN0-85965-205-X.Annie Hall at the Internet Movie DatabaseAnnie Hall at AllRoviAnnie Hall at the TCM Movie DatabaseAnnie Hall at Box Office MojoAnnie Hall at Rotten TomatoesGood Small Films (Unofficial Woodypedia and blog)The Godfather Part II is a 1974 American crime epic that Francis Ford Coppola produced, directed, and co-wrote with Mario Puzo, starring Al Pacino, Robert Duvall, Diane Keaton, and Robert De Niro. Partially based on Puzo's 1969 novel, The Godfather, the film is in part both a sequel and a prequel to The Godfather, presenting two parallel dramas. The main storyline, following the events of the first film, centers on Michael Corleone (Pacino), the new Don of the Corleone crime family, trying to hold his business ventures together from 1958 to 1959; the other is a series of flashbacks following his father, Vito Corleone (De Niro), from his childhood in Sicily in 1901 to his founding of the Corleone family in New York City.The film was released in 1974 to great critical acclaim, some even deeming it superior to the original.[3] Nominated for 11 Academy Awards and the first sequel to win for Best Picture, its six Oscars included Best Director for Coppola, Best Supporting Actor for De Niro and Best Adapted Screenplay for Coppola and Puzo. Pacino won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor and received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor.Like its predecessor, the sequel remains a highly influential film in the gangster genre.[citation needed] It was ranked as the thirty-second greatest film in American cinematic history by the American Film Institute in 1997 and it kept its rank 10 years later.[4] It was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry in 1993.[5]A sequel, The Godfather Part III, was released 16 years later in 1990.On the occasion of the 1958 first communion party for his son, Michael Corleone has a series of meetings in his role as the Don of his crime family. With Nevada Senator Pat Geary, he discusses the terms of a fourth state gaming license for the Corleones, but the two only trade insults and demand payoffs. Johnny Ola arrives to express support for Michael on behalf of Florida gangster Hyman Roth. At the same time as the Don tries to manage his depressed sister Connie and older brother Fredo, Corleone caporegime Frank Pentangeli is upset that his boss will not help him defend New York against the Rosato brothers, who work for the Jewish Roth. That night, Michael survives an assassination attempt at his home and puts consigliere Tom Hagen in charge, reassuring him of their fraternal bond.In Miami, Michael tells Roth that Pentangeli was behind the assassination attempt; he then tells Pentangeli that Roth ordered it and asks him to cooperate. Pentangeli meets the Rosatos but their men ambush him, saying they act on Michael's orders, but a passing policeman interrupts them and they flee, leaving Pentangeli for dead.Geary finds himself in Fredo's brothel with a dead prostitute and no memory of how he got there; he accepts Tom's offer of "friendship" to cover up the incident.After witnessing a rebel suicide bombing in Havana, Cuba, Michael becomes convinced of the rebels' resolve to overthrow the dictator Fulgencio Batista. Fredo brings Michael the money for a deal with Roth, but instead of turning it over to Roth, Michael asks who put out the hit on Pentangeli. Roth is reminded of his late friend Moe Greene dead in a spate of Corleone killing saying, "This is the business we've chosen. I didn't ask who gave the order because it had nothing to do with business!" At a New Year's Eve party, Fredo lets slip that he knew Johnny Ola despite his previous denial. Dismayed, Michael embraces his brother, revealing that he knows he was behind the plot on his life, and a frightened Fredo flees in the chaos. Michael's bodyguard strangles Ola but is killed by police before he can finish off the ailing Roth. Back home, Hagen informs Michael that Roth is recovering in Miami and that Kay's pregnancy has miscarried.In Washington, D.C., a Senate committee investigating the Corleone family cannot find evidence to implicate Michael until a surprise witness is called. Pentangeli, ensconced in FBI witness protection and ready to avenge the attempt on his life, is prepared to confirm accusations against Michael until his Sicilian brother attends the hearing at the Don's side; Pentangeli denies his sworn statements and the hearing dissolves in an uproar.Michael and Hagen observe that Roth's strategy to destroy Michael is well planned. Fredo has been found and persuaded to return to Nevada, and in a private meeting he explains his betrayal to Michael; he was upset about being passed over to head the family, and helped Roth, thinking there would be something in it for him. He swears he was unaware of their plan to kill Michael. He tells Michael that the Senate Committee's chief counsel is on Roth's payroll. Michael disowns Fredo and instructs Al Neri that "nothing is to happen to him while my mother's alive." Afterwards, Michael violently prevents Kay from leaving with their children; she retaliates with the revelation that her miscarriage was actually an abortion.Michael's mother dies. At the funeral, a reformed Connie implores Michael to forgive Fredo. Michael relents and embraces Fredo, but glances at Neri. Roth is refused asylum and even entry to Israel. Over Hagen's dissent, Michael plans his revenge. Hagen visits Pentangeli and offers to spare his family, reminding him that failed plotters against the Roman Emperor took their own lives.Connie helps Kay visit her children, but Michael closes the door on any forgiveness.As he arrives in Miami to be taken into custody, Hyman Roth is shot in the stomach and killed by Rocco Lampone, who is immediately shot dead by FBI agents. Frank Pentangeli is dead in his bathtub with slit wrists. Neri shoots Fredo while they are fishing on Lake Tahoe.Michael sits alone by the lake at the family compound.The Godfather Part II was shot between October 1, 1973 and June 19, 1974, and was the last major American motion picture to be printed with Technicolor's dye imbibition process until the late 1990s and was the last major American motion picture filmed in Technicolor. The scenes that took place in Cuba were shot in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic.[7] Charles Bluhdorn, whose Gulf+Western conglomerate owned Paramount, felt strongly about developing the Dominican Republic as a movie-making site.The Lake Tahoe house and grounds portrayed in the film are Fleur du Lac, the summer estate of Henry J. Kaiser on the California side of the lake. The only structures used in the movie that still remain are the complex of old native stone boathouses with their wrought iron gates. Although Fleur du Lac is private property and no one is allowed ashore there, the boathouses and multi-million dollar condominiums may be viewed from the lake.Unlike with the first film, Coppola was given near-complete control over production. In his commentary, he said this resulted in a shoot that ran very smoothly despite multiple locations and two narratives running parallel within one film.[8]Production nearly ended before it began when Pacino's lawyers told Coppola that he had grave misgivings with the script and wasn't coming. Coppola spent an entire night rewriting it before giving it to Pacino for his review. Pacino approved and the production went forward.[8]Coppola discusses his decision to make this the first major motion picture to use "Part II" in its title in the director's commentary on the DVD edition of the film released in 2002. Paramount was initially opposed because they believed the audience would not be interested in an addition to a story they had already seen. But the director prevailed, and the film's success began the common practice of numbered sequels.Still, three weeks prior to the release, film critics and journalists pronounced Part II a disaster. The cross-cutting between Vito and Michael's parallel stories were judged too frequent, not allowing enough time to leave a lasting impression on the audience. Coppola and the editors returned to the cutting room to change the film's narrative structure, but could not complete the work in time, leaving the final scenes poorly timed at the opening.[9]The Godfather Part II did not surpass the original commercially, but it was very successful nonetheless, with a $193 million gross on a $13 million budget. For Paramount, it was their highest-grossing film of 1974 and was the fifth-highest-grossing picture in the US that year.The Godfather Part II ranks among the most critically and artistically successful films in movie history, and is the most honored sequel for excellence. Whether considered separately or with its predecessor as one work, it is widely accepted as one of world cinema's greatest achievements. Many critics compare it favorably to the original although it is almost always placed below the original on lists of "greatest" movies when listed separately.The Godfather Part II:Pacino's performance in The Godfather Part II has been praised as perhaps his best,[citation needed] and the Academy was criticized for not awarding him the Academy Award for Best Actor, which went that year to Art Carney for his role in Harry and Tonto. It has come to be seen by some as one of the greatest performances in cinema history.[citation needed] In 2006, Premiere magazine issued its list of "The 100 Greatest Performances of all Time", ranking Pacino's performance at #20.[12] Later in 2009, Total Film issued "The 150 Greatest Performances of All Time", ranking Pacino's performance at #4.[13]In the chapter "The Speeches We Keep in Our Heads" from her 1998 book Simply Speaking, former television writer and Ronald Reagan's speechwriter, Peggy Noonan, analyzes "Lee Strasberg's great speech, given as Hyman Roth stood, weak and furious, before cold-eyed Michael Corleone" and explains what makes it powerful and memorable. She urges:Coppola created The Godfather Saga expressly for American television in a 1975 release that combined The Godfather and The Godfather Part II with unused footage from those two films in a chronological telling that, because it toned down the violent, sexual, and profane material, received a rating of TV-14 for its NBC debut on November 18, 1977. In 1981, Paramount released the Godfather Epic boxed set, which also told the story of the first two films in chronological order, again with additional scenes, but not redacted for broadcast sensibilities. Coppola returned to the film again in 1992 when he updated that release with footage from The Godfather Part III and more unreleased material. This home viewing release, under the title The Godfather Trilogy 19011980, had a total run time of 583 minutes (9 hours, 43 minutes), not including the set's bonus documentary by Jeff Werner on the making of the films, "The Godfather Family: A Look Inside".The Godfather DVD Collection was released on October 9, 2001 in a package[15] that contained all three filmseach with a commentary track by Coppolaand a bonus disc that featured a 73-minute documentary from 1991 entitled The Godfather Family: A Look Inside and other miscellany about the film: the additional scenes originally contained in The Godfather Saga; Francis Coppola's Notebook (a look inside a notebook the director kept with him at all times during the production of the film); rehearsal footage; a promotional featurette from 1971; and video segments on Gordon Willis's cinematography, Nino Rota's and Carmine Coppola's music, the director, the locations and Mario Puzo's screenplays. The DVD also held a Corleone family tree, a "Godfather" timeline, and footage of the Academy Award acceptance speeches.[16]The restoration was confirmed by Francis Ford Coppola during a question-and-answer session for The Godfather Part III, when he said that he had just seen the new transfer and it was "terrific".After a careful restoration of the first two movies, The Godfather movies were released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc on September 23, 2008, under the title The Godfather: The Coppola Restoration. The work was done by Robert A. Harris of Film Preserve. The Blu-ray Disc box set (four discs) includes high-definition extra features on the restoration and film. They are included on Disc 5 of the DVD box set (five discs).Other extras are ported over from Paramount's 2001 DVD release. There are slight differences between the repurposed extras on the DVD and Blu-ray Disc sets, with the HD box having more content.[17]Paramount lists the new (HD) extra features as:Between The Godfather and The Godfather Part II, Coppola directed The Conversation, released in 1974 and also nominated for Best Picture. Coppola was the third director in Hollywood history to have two films released in the same year, each nominated for Best Picture. The first was Victor Fleming for his 1939 films Gone With the Wind and The Wizard of Oz. This achievement was matched by Alfred Hitchcock with his 1940 films Foreign Correspondent and Rebecca. Since Coppola, two other directors have done the same: Herbert Ross in 1977 with The Goodbye Girl and The Turning Point, and Steven Soderbergh in 2000 with Erin Brockovich and Traffic. Coppola, however, is the only one to have done this with films he produced as well as directed.The film was the first sequel to win the Academy Award for Best Picture, and the only such sequel until The Return of the King won in 2003.December 20, 1974(1974-12-20)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Box office5 Reception6 Releases for television and video

6.1 Restoration

6.1 Restoration7 Awards and honors

7.1 Honors

7.1.1 American Film Institute



7.1 Honors

7.1.1 American Film Institute

7.1.1 American Film Institute8 References9 External links6.1 Restoration7.1 Honors

7.1.1 American Film Institute

7.1.1 American Film Institute7.1.1 American Film InstituteAl Pacino as Michael CorleoneRobert Duvall as Tom HagenDiane Keaton as Kay Adams-CorleoneRobert De Niro as Young Vito CorleoneJohn Cazale as Fredo CorleoneTalia Shire as Connie CorleoneLee Strasberg as Hyman RothMichael V. Gazzo as Frank Pentangeli Morgana King as Carmela CorleoneG. D. Spradlin as Senator Pat GearyRichard Bright as Al NeriMarianna Hill as Deanna CorleoneGastone Moschin as Don FanucciTroy Donahue as Merle JohnsonDominic Chianese as Johnny OlaAmerigo Tot as Michael's bodyguardJoe Spinell as Willi CicciBruno Kirby as Young Peter ClemenzaFrank Sivero as Young Genco AbbandandoMaria Carta as the mother of Vito CorleoneGiuseppe Sillato as Don Francesco CiccioRoman Coppola as Young Santino CorleoneJohn Megna as Young Hyman RothJulian Voloshin as Sam RothLarry Guardino as Vito's uncleDanny Aiello as Tony RosatoJohn Aprea as Young Salvatore TessioLeopoldo Trieste as Signor RobertoSalvatore Poe as Vincenzo PentangeliHarry Dean Stanton as FBI agentJames Caan as Sonny Corleone (cameo)Abe Vigoda as Salvatore Tessio (cameo)Gianni Russo as Carlo Rizzi (cameo)James Caan agreed to reprise the role of Sonny in the birthday flashback sequence demanding he be paid the same amount he received for the entire previous film for the single scene in Part II, which he received.Marlon Brando initially agreed to return for the birthday flashback sequence, but the actor, feeling mistreated by the board at Paramount, failed to show up for the single day's shooting; Coppola rewrote the scene that same day.Richard Castellano, who portrayed Peter Clemenza in the first film, also declined to return, as he and the producers could not reach an agreement on his demands that he be allowed to write the character's dialogue in the film. Clemenza's role was subsequently filled by Frank Pentangeli.Troy Donahue, in a small role as Connie's boyfriend, plays a character named Merle Johnson, which was his birth name.Two actors who appear in the film played different character roles in other Godfather films; Carmine Caridi, who plays Carmine Rosato, also went on to play crime boss Albert Volpe in The Godfather Part III, and Frank Sivero, who plays a young Genco Abbandando, appears as a bystander in The Godfather scene in which Sonny beats up Carlo for abusing Connie.Among the Senators in the hearing committee are film producer/director Roger Corman, writer/producer William Bowers, producer Phil Feldman, and science-fiction writer Richard Matheson.Was featured on Sight and Sound's list of the ten greatest films of all time in 1992 and 2002.Is featured on Roger Ebert's "Great Movies" list, though Ebert's original review of the film granted it only three out of four stars.Is ranked #7 on Entertainment Weekly's list of the "100 Greatest Movies of All Time".Is featured on movie critic Leonard Maltin's list of the "100 Must-See Films of the 20th Century".Received only one negative review on Rotten Tomatoes and a "98%" approval rating, 2 points less than The Godfather (although it does hold a higher rating average of 9.2/10 compared to the predecessor's 9.1/10) but 32 points more than The Godfather Part III.[10]Is ranked #1 onTV Guide's 1998 list of the "50 Greatest Movies of All Time on TV and Video".[11]Is ranked #3 on IMDb's Top 100 Movies of all time, with its predecessor The Godfather ranked #2.Godfather WorldThe Masterpiece That Almost Wasn't...when the shooting stoppedEmulsional Rescue Revealing The GodfatherThe Godfather on the Red CarpetFour Short Films on The Godfather

The Godfather vs. The Godfather, Part II
Cannoli
Riffing on the Riffing
Clemenza

The Godfather vs. The Godfather, Part IICannoliRiffing on the RiffingClemenzaThe Godfather vs. The Godfather, Part IICannoliRiffing on the RiffingClemenza1998 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  #322003 AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Michael Corleone  #11 Villain

Michael Corleone  #11 Villain2005 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"Keep your friends close, but your enemies closer."  #58
"I know it was you, Fredo. You broke my heart. You broke my heart."  Nominated
"Michael, we're bigger than U.S. Steel."  Nominated

"Keep your friends close, but your enemies closer."  #58"I know it was you, Fredo. You broke my heart. You broke my heart."  Nominated"Michael, we're bigger than U.S. Steel."  Nominated2007 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #322008 AFI's 10 Top 10  #3 Gangster film

Epic film  Nominated

Epic film  NominatedMichael Corleone  #11 Villain"Keep your friends close, but your enemies closer."  #58"I know it was you, Fredo. You broke my heart. You broke my heart."  Nominated"Michael, we're bigger than U.S. Steel."  NominatedEpic film  NominatedThe Godfather  Official site from Paramount PicturesThe Godfather Part II at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Godfather Part II at AllRoviThe Godfather: Part II at MetacriticThe Godfather Part II at Rotten TomatoesThe Godfather Part II at the TCM Movie DatabaseHigh Noon is a 1952 American Western film directed by Fred Zinnemann and starring Gary Cooper and Grace Kelly. The film tells in nearly real time the story of a town marshal forced to face a gang of killers by himself. The screenplay was written by Carl Foreman.In 1989, High Noon was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant," entering the registry during the NFR's first year of existence.[2] The film is #27 on the American Film Institute's 2007 list of great films.Will Kane (Gary Cooper), the longtime marshal of Hadleyville, New Mexico Territory, has just married pacifist Quaker Amy Fowler (Grace Kelly) and turned in his badge. He intends to become a storekeeper elsewhere. Suddenly, the town learns that Frank Miller (Ian MacDonald)a criminal Kane brought to justiceis due to arrive on the noon train.Miller had been sentenced to hang but was pardoned on an unspecified legal technicality. In court, he had vowed to get revenge on Kane and anyone else who got in the way. Miller's three gang members (his younger brother Ben (Sheb Wooley), Jack Colby (Lee Van Cleef) and Pierce (Robert J. Wilke)) wait for him at the station.Kane and his wife leave town, but fearing that the gang will hunt him down and be a danger to the townspeople, Kane turns back. He reclaims his badge and scours the town for help, even interrupting Sunday church services, with little success. His deputy, Harvey Pell (Lloyd Bridges), resigns because Kane did not recommend him as the new marshal.Kane goes to warn Helen Ramrez (Katy Jurado), first Frank Millers lover, then Kane's, and now Harvey's. Aware of what Miller will do to her if he finds her, she quickly sells her business and prepares to leave town.Amy gives her husband an ultimatum: she is leaving on the noon train, with or without him.The worried townspeople encourage Kane to leave, hoping that would defuse the situation. Even Kane's good friends the Fullers are at odds about how to deal with the situation. Mildred Fuller (Eve McVeagh) wants her husband, Sam (Harry Morgan) to speak with Kane when he comes to their home, but he makes her claim he is not home.In the end, Kane faces the Miller Gang alone. Kane guns down two of the gang, though he himself is wounded in the process. Helen Ramrez and Amy both board the train (pulled by the famous locomotive, Sierra No. 3), but Amy gets off when she hears the sound of gunfire. Amy chooses her husband's life over her religious beliefs, shooting Pierce from behind. Frank then takes her hostage to force Kane into the open. However, Amy suddenly attacks Frank, giving Kane a clear shot, and Kane shoots Frank Miller dead. As the townspeople emerge, Kane contemptuously throws his marshal's star in the dirt and leaves town with his wife.According to the 2002 documentary Darkness at High Noon: The Carl Foreman Documents, written, produced, and directed by Lionel Chetwynd, Foreman's role in the creation and production of High Noon has over the years been unfairly downplayed in favor of Foreman's former partner and producer, Stanley Kramer.[4] The documentary was prompted by and based in part on a single-spaced 11-page letter that Foreman wrote to film critic Bosley Crowther in April 1952.[4] In the letter, Foreman asserts that the film began as a four-page plot outline about "aggression in a western background" and "telling a motion picture story in the exact time required for the events of the story itself" (a device used in High Noon).[4] An associate of Foreman pointed out similarities between Foreman's outline and the short story "The Tin Star" by John W. Cunningham, which led Foreman to purchase the rights to Cunningham's story and proceed with the original outline.[4] By the time the documentary aired, most of those immediately involved were dead, including Kramer, Foreman, Fred Zinnemann, and Gary Cooper. Kramer's widow rebuts Foreman's contentions; Victor Navasky, author of Naming Names and familiar with some of the circumstances surrounding High Noon because of interviews with Kramer's widow among others, said the documentary seemed "one-sided, and the problem is it makes a villain out of Stanley Kramer, when it was more complicated than that."[4]The film's production and release also intersected with the second Red Scare and the Korean War. Writer, producer, and partner Carl Foreman was called before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC) while he was writing the film. Foreman had not been in the Communist Party for almost ten years, but he declined to name names and was considered an "uncooperative witness" by the HUAC.[5] When Stanley Kramer found out some of this, he forced Foreman to sell his part of their company, and tried to get him kicked off the making of the picture. Fred Zinnemann, Gary Cooper, and Bruce Church intervened. There was also a problem with the Bank of America loan, as Foreman had not yet signed certain papers. Thus, Foreman remained on the production but moved to England before it was released nationally, as he knew he would never be allowed to work in America.[5]Kramer claimed he had not stood up for Foreman partly because Foreman was threatening, dishonestly, to name Kramer as a Communist.[5] Foreman said that Kramer was afraid of what would happen to him and his career if Kramer did not cooperate with the Committee. Kramer wanted Foreman to name names and not plead his Fifth Amendment rights.[5] Foreman was eventually blacklisted by the Hollywood companies. There had also been pressure against Foreman by, among others, Harry Cohn of Columbia Pictures (Kramer's brand new boss at the time), John Wayne of the MPA, and Hedda Hopper of the Los Angeles Times.[5] Cast and crew members were also affected. Howland Chamberlin was blacklisted while Floyd Crosby and Lloyd Bridges were "graylisted."[5]High Noon was filmed in the late summer/early fall of 1951 in several locations in California.[6] Opening scenes were shot at Iverson Movie Ranch. A rural road east of Oakdale, CA was the setting for the Hadleyville train depot. Columbia Ranch and Columbia State Historic Park were both used for the town of Hadleyville itself. St. Joseph's Church, in Tuolumne City, California, was used for exterior shots of the church where Kane solicits help from the townspeople. Sierra No. 3, the movie star locomotive, brought villain Frank Miller into Hadleyville after his release from prison.The film earned an estimated $3.4 million at the North American box office in 1952.[7]Upon its release, the film was criticized by audiences, as it did not contain such expected Western archetypes as chases, violence, action, and picture postcard scenery. Rather, it presented emotional and moralistic dialogue throughout most of the film. Only in the last few minutes were there action scenes.[8]In the Soviet Union the film was criticized as "a glorification of the individual."[5] The American Left appreciated the film for what they believed was an allegory of people (Hollywood people, in particular) who were afraid to stand up to HUAC. However, the film eventually gained the respect of people with conservative/anti-communist views. Ronald Reagan, a conservative and fervent anti-Communist, said he appreciated the film because the main character had a strong dedication to duty, law, and the well-being of the town despite the refusal of the townspeople to help. Dwight Eisenhower loved the film and frequently screened it in the White House, as did many other American presidents.[5] Bill Clinton cited High Noon as his favorite film and screened it a record 17 times at the White House.[9]Actor John Wayne disliked the film because he felt it was an allegory for blacklisting, which he actively supported. In his Playboy interview from May 1971, Wayne stated he considered High Noon "the most un-American thing Ive ever seen in my whole life"[10] and went on to say he would never regret having helped blacklist liberal screenwriter Carl Foreman from Hollywood. Ironically, Gary Cooper himself had conservative political views and was a "friendly witness" before HUAC several years earlier, although he did not name names and later strongly opposed blacklisting.[11] Wayne accepted Cooper's Academy Award for the role as Cooper was unable to attend the presentation.In 1959, Wayne teamed up with director Howard Hawks to make Rio Bravo as a conservative response. Hawks explained, "I made Rio Bravo because I didn't like High Noon. Neither did Duke. I didn't think a good town marshal was going to run around town like a chicken with his head cut off asking everyone to help. And who saves him? His Quaker wife. That isn't my idea of a good Western."[12]Irritated by Hawks's criticisms, director Fred Zinnemann responded, "I admire Hawks very much. I only wish he'd leave my films alone!"[13] Zinnemann later said in a 1973 interview, "I'm told that Howard Hawks has said on various occasions that he made Rio Bravo as a kind of answer to High Noon, because he didn't believe that a good sheriff would go running around town asking for other people's help to do his job. I'm rather surprised at this kind of thinking. Sheriffs are people and no two people are alike. The story of High Noon takes place in the Old West but it is really a story about a man's conflict of conscience. In this sense it is a cousin to A Man for All Seasons. In any event, respect for the Western Hero has not been diminished by High Noon."[14]The movie won Academy Awards for:The film was nominated for Best Director, Best Picture, and Best Writing, Screenplay. It lost Best Picture to Cecil B. DeMille's The Greatest Show on Earth.Entertainment Weekly ranked Will Kane on their list of The 20 All Time Coolest Heroes in Pop Culture.[16]Producer Carl Foreman would later be blacklisted from Hollywood. Ironically, despite disliking the film, it was John Wayne who picked up the absent Gary Cooper's Academy Award.Mexican actress Katy Jurado won the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role of Helen Ramrez, becoming the first Mexican actress to receive the award.American Film Institute recognitionIn 1989, 22-year-old Polish graphic designer Tomasz Sarnecki transformed Marian Stachurski's 1959 Polish variant of the High Noon poster into a Solidarity election poster for the first partially free elections in communist Poland. The poster, which was displayed all over Poland, shows Cooper armed with a folded ballot saying "Wybory" (i.e. election) in his right hand while the Solidarity logo is pinned to his vest above the sheriff's badge. The message at the bottom of the poster reads: "W samo poudnie: 4 czerwca 1989," which translates to "High Noon: 4 June 1989."In 2004 former Solidarity leader Lech Wasa wrote:[17]According to an English professor at Yeshiva University,[10] High Noon is the film most requested for viewing by U.S. presidents. It has been cited as the favorite film of Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower [18] and Bill Clinton.[18][19]The conflict of the role of the Western hero is ironically portrayed in the film Die Hard. The villain confuses John Wayne as the hero walking off into the sunset with Grace Kelly, only to be corrected by the protagonist.High Noon is the favourite film of DCI Gene Hunt of Life on Mars and Ashes to Ashes. Hunt makes periodic references to the film throughout the two series' five seasons.July 24, 1952(1952-07-24) (New York)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Production locations

3.1 Production locations4 Reception

4.1 Accolades
4.2 Cultural influence

4.1 Accolades4.2 Cultural influence5 Remakes and sequel6 Other appearances7 References8 External links3.1 Production locations4.1 Accolades4.2 Cultural influenceGary Cooper as Marshal Will KaneThomas Mitchell as Mayor Jonas HendersonLloyd Bridges as Deputy Sheriff Harvey PellKaty Jurado as Helen RamrezGrace Kelly as Amy (Fowler) KaneOtto Kruger as Judge Percy MettrickLon Chaney, Jr. as Martin Howe (as Lon Chaney)Harry Morgan as Sam Fuller (as Henry Morgan)Ian MacDonald as Frank MillerEve McVeagh as Mildred FullerMorgan Farley as Dr. Mahin, ministerHarry Shannon as CooperLee Van Cleef as Jack ColbyRobert J. Wilke as Pierce (as Robert Wilke)Sheb Wooley as Ben MillerBest Actor in a Leading Role - Gary CooperBest Film Editing - Elmo Williams and Harry W. Gerstad [15]Best Music, Scoring of a Dramatic or Comedy Picture - Dimitri TiomkinBest Music, Song - Dimitri Tiomkin and Ned Washington for "Do Not Forsake Me, Oh My Darlin'", sung by Tex Ritter.1998 AFI's 100 Years100 Movies #332001 AFI's 100 Years100 Thrills #202003 AFI's 100 Years100 Heroes and Villains:

Will Kane, hero #5

Will Kane, hero #52004 AFI's 100 Years100 Songs:

"High Noon (Do Not Forsake Me, Oh My Darlin')" #25

"High Noon (Do Not Forsake Me, Oh My Darlin')" #252005 AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores #102006 AFI's 100 Years100 Cheers #272007 AFI's 100 Years100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #272008 AFI's 10 Top 10 #2 Western filmWill Kane, hero #5"High Noon (Do Not Forsake Me, Oh My Darlin')" #25In 1966, Four Star Television produced a High Noon television pilot. The 30-minute pilot was called "The Clock Strikes Noon Again" and was set 20 years after the original movie. Peter Fonda played Will Kane Jr., who goes to Hadleyville after Frank Miller's son kills his father (the Gary Cooper character). His mother (the Grace Kelly character) dies shortly after from grief. In Hadleyville, Will Kane Jr. meets Helen Ramirez, played by Katy Jurado (who had played the same character in the original movie). Helen returned to town and was now running a hotel/restaurant. The script was written by James Warner Bellah. No series came from this unsold TV pilot.A made-for-TV sequel, High Noon, Part II: The Return of Will Kane (produced in 1980, 28 years after the original movie was released), featured Lee Majors in the Cooper role. CBS ran this in a two-hour time slot on November 15, 1980.The 1980 science fiction film Outland borrowed from the story of High Noon for its plot. The movie starred Sean Connery.In 2000, High Noon was entirely reworked for the cable channel TBS with Tom Skerritt in the lead role. This remake is available on DVD.In 2002, The Simpsons 13th Season Finale "Poppa's Got a Brand New Badge" draws inspiration from both High Noon and The Sopranos when Homer, in charge of Spring Shield Security, has to face by himself the revenge of Fat Tony, whose operations Homer had disrupted.Gary Cooper has a cameo as his "High Noon" character Will Kane in the 1959 Bob Hope film Alias Jesse James. After shooting a bad guy, Will, wearing his "High Noon" tin star, said his only line in the film -- "Yup."High Noon at the Internet Movie DatabaseHigh Noon at the TCM Movie DatabaseHigh Noon at AllRoviHigh Noon at Rotten TomatoesTo Kill a Mockingbird is a 1962 American drama film adaptation of Harper Lee's novel of the same name directed by Robert Mulligan. It stars Mary Badham in the role of Scout and Gregory Peck in the role of Atticus Finch.In 1995, the film was listed in the National Film Registry. It also ranks twenty-fifth on the American Film Institute's 10th anniversary list of the greatest American movies of all time. In 2003, AFI named Atticus Finch the greatest movie hero of the 20th century.To Kill a Mockingbird marks the film debuts of Robert Duvall, William Windom, and Alice Ghostley.The film's young protagonists, Jean Louise "Scout" Finch (Mary Badham) and her brother Jem (Phillip Alford), live in the fictional town of Maycomb, Alabama, during the 1930s. The story covers three years, during which Scout and Jem undergo changes in their lives. They begin as innocent children, who spend their days happily playing games with each other and spying on Arthur "Boo" Radley (Robert Duvall), who has not been seen for many years by anybody as a result of never leaving his house and about whom many wicked rumours circulate. Their father, Atticus (Gregory Peck), is a town lawyer and has a strong belief that all people are to be treated fairly, to turn the other cheek, and to stand for what you believe. He also allows his children to call him by his first name. Through their father's work as a lawyer, Scout and Jem begin to learn of the racism and evil prevalent in their town, and mature painfully and quickly as they are exposed to it.The kids follow Atticus to watch a rape trial, in which an innocent black man, Tom Robinson, is wrongfully found guilty of raping Mayella Ewell, despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary (among Atticus' chief arguments, he points out that Tom is crippled in his left arm, and that the supposed rapist would have had to make extensive use of his left hand to have carried out the crime as it was being described by the teenage "victim" and her father). Atticus also brings to light the alarmingly unusual and suspicious fact that the girl had not even been examined by a doctor after the supposed assault to check for signs of rape, and even after Atticus' earnest pleas to the jury for them to cast aside their prejudices against blacks and instead to focus on the evidence of Tom's obvious innocence. Tom is doomed, however, when he takes the stand in his own defense and reveals that he felt pity for the victim due to her circumstances.Atticus arrives home to find out that Robinson has been killed in an attempt to escape from jail. Atticus is subsequently vilified by some of the locals for his having defended a black man, and the whole town is in quite a stir over the matter for a good while. After a few months, things appear to have settled down, and Scout goes to an Autumn Harvest pageant with Jem. On their way home that night, Scout and Jem are attacked by the vengeful Bob Ewell, the drunkard father (and the real assailant) of the girl whom Tom Robinson had been falsely accused of molesting. Mr. Ewell slashes at Scout with a knife, but the chicken-wire framework of her pageant costume protects her from the blade. During the struggle, Jem is knocked unconscious and his arm is broken, but then Bob Ewell is overpowered and killed by a tall dark figure that suddenly appears on the scene. Scout sees the whole thing from a small view hole in her ham costume that she is still wearing.Jem is carried home by this mysterious man who turns out to be the previously-mentioned Arthur "Boo" Radley, and afterwards it is revealed that Boo  in caring appreciation for Scout and Jem's not having taunted and shunned him the way other townspeople had done  had for a long time assumed the role of the children's guardian angel, often secretly watching over and following a distance behind Scout and Jem when they were out at night, to help them and protect them from harm. The film ends with Scout considering the past three years' events from Boo's point of view, and Atticus watching over the sleeping Jem.All music composed by Elmer Bernstein; A re-recording has been performed by the Royal Scottish National Orchestra conducted by the composer.Gregory Peck's performance became synonymous with the role and character of Atticus Finch. Alan J. Pakula remembered hearing from Peck when he was first approached with the role: "He called back immediately. No maybes. [...] I must say the man and the character he played were not unalike."[1] Peck later said in an interview that he was drawn to the role because the book reminded him of growing up in La Jolla, California.[2] "Hardly a day passes that I don't think how lucky I was to be cast in that film," Peck said in a 1997 interview. "I recently sat at a dinner next to a woman who saw it when she was 14 years old, and she said it changed her life. I hear things like that all the time."[3]The 1962 softcover edition of the novel opens with the following: "The Southern town of Maycomb, Alabama reminds me of the California town I grew up in. The characters of the novel are like people I knew as a boy. I think perhaps the great appeal of the novel is that it reminds readers everywhere of a person or a town they have known. It is to me a universal story - moving, passionate and told with great humor and tenderness. Gregory Peck"Upon Peck's death in 2003, Brock Peters, who played Tom Robinson in the film version, quoted Harper Lee at Peck's eulogy, saying, "Atticus Finch gave him an opportunity to play himself." Peters concluded his eulogy stating, "To my friend Gregory Peck, to my friend Atticus Finch, vaya con Dios."[4] Peters remembered the role of Tom Robinson when he recalled, "It certainly is one of my proudest achievements in life, one of the happiest participations in film or theater I have experienced."[5] Peters remained friends not only with Peck but with Mary Badham throughout his life.In 1995, To Kill a Mockingbird was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."[6] It is also Robert Duvall's big-screen debut, as the misunderstood recluse Boo Radley. Duvall was cast on the recommendation of screenwriter Horton Foote, who met him at Neighborhood Playhouse in New York City where Duvall starred in a 1957 production of Foote's play, The Midnight Caller.[7]The American Film Institute named Atticus Finch the greatest movie hero of the 20th century.[8] Additionally, the AFI ranked the movie second on their 100 Years... 100 Cheers list, behind It's a Wonderful Life.[9] The film was ranked number 34 on AFI's list of the 100 greatest movies of all time, but moved up to number 25 on the 10th Anniversary list.[10] In June 2008, the AFI revealed its "Ten top Ten"the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genresafter polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. To Kill a Mockingbird was acknowledged as the best film in the courtroom drama genre.[11]In 2007, Hamilton was honored by the Harlem community for her part in the movie. She is the last surviving African-American adult who had a speaking part in the movie. When told of the award, she said, "I think it is terrific. I'm very pleased and very surprised."[12]The film won three Academy Awards out of the eight for which it was nominated:[14]Other nominations were for Best Picture (Producer, Alan J. Pakula), Best Director (Robert Mulligan), Best Cinematography, Black-and-White (Russell Harlan), Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Mary Badham), and Best Music, Score  Substantially Original (Elmer Bernstein)The film was selected for the 1963 Cannes Film Festival in feature film category, winning the Gary Cooper Award.[15][16]The film generally focuses on the mystery surrounding Boo Radley and the trial of Tom Robinson, whereas the novel features these as episodes in Scout's childhood development. In addition, several smaller details were changed:The film was restored and released as a Blu-Ray DVD in 20121 Plot2 Cast3 Soundtrack4 Critical response5 Awards and honors

5.1 Academy Awards
5.2 Golden Globe Awards
5.3 Cannes Film Festival

5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Golden Globe Awards5.3 Cannes Film Festival6 Differences from the novel7 Restoration8 See also9 References 10 External links5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Golden Globe Awards5.3 Cannes Film FestivalGregory Peck as Atticus FinchMary Badham as Jean Louise "Scout" FinchPhillip Alford as Jeremy Atticus "Jem" FinchRobert Duvall as Arthur "Boo" RadleyJohn Megna as Charles Baker "Dill" HarrisAlice Ghostley as Stephanie CrawfordBrock Peters as Tom RobinsonFrank Overton as Sheriff Heck TateRosemary Murphy as Maude "Maudie" AtkinsonRuth White as Mrs. DuboseEstelle Evans as CalpurniaRichard Hale as Nathan RadleyJames K Anderson as Robert E. Lee "Bob" EwellCollin Wilcox as Mayella EwellWilliam Windom as Mr. Gilmer, District AttorneyPaul Fix as Judge TaylorBill Walker as Reverend SykesDavid Crawford as David RobinsonDan White as Mob leader (uncredited)Crahan Denton as Walter Cunningham, Sr.Steven Charles Condit as Walter Cunningham, Jr. (uncredited)Kim Hamilton as Helen Robinson (uncredited)Jester Hairston as Spence Robinson, Tom Robinson's father (uncredited)Kim Stanley as Jean Louise Finch as an adult (narrator  uncredited)AFI's 100 Years100 Movies - #34AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Atticus Finch - #1 Hero

Atticus Finch - #1 HeroAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"Miss Jean Louise, stand up. Your father's passing." - Nominated[13]
"You never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view, until you climb inside of his skin and walk around in it. - Nominated[13]

"Miss Jean Louise, stand up. Your father's passing." - Nominated[13]"You never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view, until you climb inside of his skin and walk around in it. - Nominated[13]AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - #17AFI's 100 Years100 Cheers - #2AFI's 100 Years100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #25AFI's 10 Top 10 - #1 Courtroom DramaAtticus Finch - #1 Hero"Miss Jean Louise, stand up. Your father's passing." - Nominated[13]"You never really understand a person until you consider things from his point of view, until you climb inside of his skin and walk around in it. - Nominated[13]Academy Award for Best Actor  Gregory PeckAcademy Award for Best Art Direction - Set Decoration, Black-and-White  (Henry Bumstead, Alexander Golitzen, and Oliver Emert)Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay - Horton FooteGolden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Drama  Gregory PeckGolden Globe Award for Best Original Score Motion Picture  Elmer BernsteinGolden Globe Award for Best Film Promoting International Understanding  To Kill a MockingbirdIn the plot with Jem and the tree, in the novel, he and Scout do not see Mr. Nathan Radley cement the tree, whereas in the film, they do.The subplot where Jem goes to Mrs. Dubose's home to read to her as she attempts to overcome her opiate addiction is omitted.In the novel, Jem goes back to the Radley house to get his pants later that night. In the movie, he goes back right after he loses them. Also, in the novel, Mr. Nathan Radley comes out with his shotgun when he finds them in the yard. In the film, he comes out with it when Jem goes back.Aunt Alexandra, Uncle Jack, and several other members of the Finch family mentioned in the novel are either omitted or unmentioned in the film. The Finch's landing scene is omitted as well.In the film there is no Little Chuck Little.There is no D.C. in the film, the boy who is told to close the door.The scene where it snows in Maycomb and Miss Maudie's house burns down is omitted.The scene of the rabid dog is much less intense than in the book.In the novel, Calpurnia makes an appearance at the trial of Tom Robinson and informs Atticus that his kids are not at home. This is when he realizes that they are there in the courtroom. In the film, Calpurnia does not appear at the trial, and afterwards, Atticus is simply seen walking home with the kids, how he learned of their presence is unknown.In the novel, Tom was shot by prison guards as he was running away from the mob toward the fence. In the film he was shot by deputies taking him to prison. The prison guards shot to kill; the deputies shot to stop him.In the novel, the Finch children go with Calpurnia to her church while their father is out of town. In the movie, this is omitted, though they know Reverend Sykes and sit with him during the trial.Miss Caroline is also omitted from the film, she is only mentioned by name. In the film, Scout's first day of school goes straight to her fight with Walter Cunningham and later to the reason she doesn't want to go back to school, mentioning to Atticus that Miss Caroline forbade her from reading.In the novel, Mrs. Dubose is the one who calls Atticus a "nigger lover" in the presence of Scout and Jem. In the film, Bob Ewell is the one who calls him this and says it directly to his face. Jem is the one of the two children who hears Atticus called this. Scout is present, but she does not hear because she is asleep.Reverend Sykes tells the children about Tom Robinson's damaged left arm in the novel, but in the film, Tom Robinson tells the court about his injury himself.Mrs. Dubose's character only appears in one scene of the film.In the novel, Tom's testifies that Mayella Ewell revealed to him that her father molests her. This is omitted in the film.In the novel, Dill ran from Meridian to the Finches because he hates his new father. This is omitted in the film.In the novel, Dill is Mrs. Rachel's nephew, while in the film, he is Mrs. Stephanie Crawford's nephew.Rachel is also absent from the movie, however the characters of Mrs. Rachel and Mrs. Stephanie Crawford are combined into one character.In the novel, Boo Radley's only line is "Will you take me home?" which he says to Scout in the final chapter. In the film, this line is left out.In the film, the role of Mr. Dolphus Raymond and Zeebo are completely left out.In the film, Atticus allows Jem to come with him to the Robinson home to inform them of Tom's death. In the novel, this job is given to Calpurnia, although Jem and Dill are with them because Jem was teaching Dill to swim and were reluctantly picked up by Atticus on the way over to the Robinson home.According to the novel, Tom Robinson's left arm was twelve inches shorter than his right, but in the film, both arms are roughly the same length.There are no fights between Jem and Scout in the film, whereas in the book there are quite a few.Tom Robinson's father appeared in the film, but was not a character in the novel.The gum that is found in the knothole in the book is not mentioned in the film.The night of Mayella's alleged rape is August 21, whereas in the book it is November 21.The "romance" between Dill and Scout as featured in the novel is entirely left out of the film.In the novel, Atticus tells Scout and Jem, "Shoot all the bluejays you want, if you can hit 'em, but remember it's a sin to kill a mockingbird," after they receive air rifles as presents. In the movie, he says this during lunch with Walter Cunningham. The air rifles are not mentioned in the film, though Jem's disappointment about not being allowed to have a gun is portrayed.In the film, Atticus tells Calpurnia to call for a doctor, whereas in the novel Aunt Alexandra calls.In the novel, the trial begins with the whites entering first into the courtroom, followed separately by the blacks, as they move into their separate seats, with the blacks on the upper levels. In the film, the black and white onlookers are seen entering the courtroom together into their designated seats, with the blacks seated in the upper levels as in the novel.La Joven (The Young One), the 1960 film by Luis BuuelList of To Kill a Mockingbird charactersTrial moviesStudying TKAM? Here are some study notes and themes.'To Kill a Mockingbird at the Internet Movie DatabaseTo Kill a Mockingbird at Box Office MojoTo Kill A Mockingbird at the TCM Movie DatabaseAtticus Finch's closing argument in text and audio from AmericanRhetoric.comTo Kill A Mockingbird location and production notesIt Happened One Night is a 1934 American romantic comedy film with elements of screwball comedy directed by Frank Capra, in which a pampered socialite (Claudette Colbert) tries to get out from under her father's thumb, and falls in love with a roguish reporter (Clark Gable). The plot was based on the August 1933 short story Night Bus by Samuel Hopkins Adams, which provided the shooting title. It Happened One Night was one of the last romantic comedies created before the MPAA began enforcing the 1930 production code in 1934. In spite of its title the movie takes place over several nights.The film was the first to win all five major Academy Awards (Best Picture, Director, Actor, Actress, and Screenplay), a feat that would not be matched until One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975) and later by The Silence of the Lambs (1991). In 1993, It Happened One Night was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."[3]Spoiled heiress Ellen "Ellie" Andrews (Claudette Colbert) marries fortune-hunter "King" Westley (Jameson Thomas) against the wishes of her extremely wealthy father (Walter Connolly) who has the marriage annulled. She runs away, boarding a bus to New York City, to reunite with her new spouse, when she meets fellow bus passenger Peter Warne (Clark Gable), an out-of-work newspaper reporter. Warne recognizes her and gives her a choice: if she will give him an exclusive on her story, he will help her reunite with Westley. If not, he will tell her father where she is and collect the reward offered for her return. Ellie agrees to the first choice.Soon penniless, Ellie has to rely completely on Peter. As they go through several adventures together, Ellie loses her initial disdain for him and begins to fall in love. When they have to hitchhike, Peter claims to be an expert on the subject. As car after car passes them by, he eventually ends up thumbing his nose at them. The sheltered Ellie then shows him how it's done. She stops the next car, driven by Danker (Alan Hale), dead in its tracks by lifting up her skirt and showing off a shapely leg.When they stop for a break, Danker tries to drive off with their luggage. Peter chases him down and takes his car. One night, nearing the end of their journey together, Ellie confesses her love to Peter. Peter mulls over what she has said, decides he loves her too, and leaves to make arrangements after she has fallen asleep. When the owners of the motel in which they are staying notice that Peter's car is gone, they roust Ellie out of bed and kick her out.Believing Peter has deserted her, Ellie calls her father, who is so relieved to get her back that he agrees to let her marry Westley. Although Ellie has no desire to be with Westley, she believes Peter has betrayed her for the reward money, so she agrees to have a second, formal wedding. Meanwhile, Peter has obtained money from his editor to marry Ellie, but as he drives back to tell her, they pass each other on the road.Ellie tries to pretend that nothing has happened, but she is unable to fool her father. She finally reveals the whole story (as she sees it). When Peter comes to Ellie's home, Mr. Andrews offers him the reward money, but Peter insists on being paid only his expenses: a paltry $39.60. When Ellie's father presses him for an explanation of his odd behavior, Peter admits he loves Ellie (although he thinks he is out of his mind to do so), then storms out.At the wedding ceremony, as Mr. Andrews walks his daughter down the aisle, he reveals to Ellie Peter's refusal of the reward money and quietly encourages her to run off again, telling her that her car is out back for a quick get-away. At the point where she is to say "I do", she makes up her mind. She runs off to find Peter. Her pleased father pays Westley off, enabling Ellie to marry Peter.Neither Gable nor Colbert were the first choices to play the lead roles. Miriam Hopkins first rejected the part of Ellie. Robert Montgomery and Myrna Loy were then offered the roles, but each turned the script down, though Loy later noted that the final story as filmed bore little resemblance to the script that she and Montgomery had been offered for their perusal.[4] Margaret Sullavan also rejected the part.[5] Constance Bennett was willing to play the role if she could produce the film herself; however, Columbia Pictures would not allow this. Then Bette Davis wanted the role,[6] but was under contract with Warner Brothers and Jack Warner refused to loan her.[7] Carole Lombard was unable to accept, because the filming schedule conflicted with that of Bolero.[8] Loretta Young also turned it down.[9]Harry Cohn suggested Colbert, and she initially turned the role down.[10] Colbert's first film, For the Love of Mike (1927), had been directed by Frank Capra, and it was such a disaster that she vowed to never make another with him. Later on, she agreed to appear in It Happened One Night only if her salary was doubled to $50,000, and also on the condition that the filming of her role be completed in four weeks so that she could take her well-planned vacation.[11]According to Hollywood legend, Gable was lent to Columbia Pictures, then considered a minor studio, as some kind of "punishment" for refusing a role at his own studio. This tale has been partially refuted by more recent biographies. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer did not have a movie project ready for Gable, and the studio was paying him his contracted salary of $2,000 per week whether he worked or not. Louis B. Mayer lent him to Columbia Pictures for $2,500 per week, hence netting MGM $500 per week while he was gone.[12] Capra, however, insists that Gable was a reluctant participant in the film. [13]Filming began in a tense atmosphere as Gable and Colbert were dissatisfied with the quality of the script. However, they established a friendly working relationship and found that the script was no worse than those of many of their earlier films. Capra understood their dissatisfaction and tried to lighten the mood by having Gable play practical jokes on Colbert, who responded with good humor.[12]Colbert, however, continued to show her displeasure on the set. She also initially balked at pulling up her skirt to entice a passing driver to provide a ride, complaining that it was unladylike. Upon seeing the chorus girl who was brought in as her body double, an outraged Colbert told the director, "Get her out of here. I'll do it. That's not my leg!"[14] Through the filming, Capra claimed, Colbert "had many little tantrums, motivated by her antipathy toward me," however "she was wonderful in the part."[14] After her acceptance speech at the Oscars ceremony, she went back on stage and thanked Capra for making the film.[15]After filming was completed, Colbert complained to her friend, "I just finished the worst picture in the world."[14][16] Capra fretted that the film was released to indifferent reviews and initially only did so-so business. Then, after it was released to the secondary movie houses, word-of-mouth began to spread and tickets sales became brisk. It turned out to be a major hit, easily Columbia's biggest hit to date.[17]In 1935, after her Academy Award nomination, Colbert decided not to attend the presentation, feeling confident that she would not win the award, and instead, planned to take a cross-country railroad trip. After she was named the winner, studio chief Harry Cohn sent someone to "drag her off" the train, which had not yet left the station, and take her to the ceremony. Colbert arrived wearing a two-piece traveling suit which she had the Paramount Pictures costume designer, Travis Banton, make for her trip.[18]The film won all five of the Academy Awards for which it was nominated:At the 7th Academy Awards for 1934, It Happened One Night became the first film ever to win the "Big Five" Academy Awards (Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor, Best Actress, and Best Writing). To date, only two more films have achieved this feat: One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest in 1975 and The Silence of the Lambs in 1991.[19] Also, It Happened One Night was the last film to win both lead acting Academy Awards, until 1975's One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest also won both lead acting awards.On December 15, 1996, Clark Gable's Oscar was auctioned off to Steven Spielberg for $607,500; Spielberg promptly donated the statuette to the Motion Picture Academy.[20] On June 9, the following year, Colbert's Oscar was offered for auction by Christie's. No bids were made for it.It Happened One Night was adapted as a radio play on the March 20, 1939 broadcast of Lux Radio Theater, with Colbert and Gable reprising their roles. The movie was also adapted as a radio play for the January 28, 1940 broadcast of The Campbell Playhouse.It Happened One Night made an immediate impact on the public. In one scene, Gable undresses for bed, taking off his shirt to reveal that he is bare-chested. An urban legend claims that, as a result, sales of men's undershirts declined noticeably.[21] The movie also prominently features a Greyhound bus in the story, spurring interest in bus travel nationwide.[22]The unpublished memoirs of animator Friz Freleng mention that this was one of his favorite films. It Happened One Night has a unique connection to the cartoon character Bugs Bunny with a minor character, Oscar Shapely, continually calling the Gable character "Doc", an imaginary character named "Bugs Dooley" mentioned once to frighten Shapely, and a scene in which Gable eats carrots while talking quickly with his mouth full, as Bugs does.[23]Joseph Stalin was a fan of the film,[24] as was Adolf Hitler.[25]Parodies of the film abound. The 1937 Laurel and Hardy comedy Way Out West parodied the famous hitchhiking scene, with Stan Laurel managing to stop a stage coach using the same technique.[26] Mel Brooks's film Spaceballs (1987) parodies the wedding scene. As she walks down the aisle to wed Prince Valium, Princess Vespa (Daphne Zuniga) is told by her father, King Roland, that Lone Starr forsook the reward for the princess's return and only asked to be reimbursed for the cost of the trip.[27]The film has also sparked a number of remakes including the musicals Eve Knew Her Apples (1945) starring Ann Miller and You Can't Run Away from It (1956) Technicolor and CinemaScope musical comedy starring June Allyson and Jack Lemmon, directed and produced by Dick Powell.[28]Recent films have also used familiar plot points from It Happened One Night. In Bandits, (2001), Joe Blake (Bruce Willis) erects a blanket partition between motel room beds out of respect for Kate Wheeler's (Cate Blanchett's) privacy. He remarks that he saw them do the same thing in an old movie.[29] In Sex and the City 2, Carrie and Mr. Big watch the film (specifically the hitchhiking scene) in a hotel. Later in the film, in an attempt to get a taxi in Abu Dhabi, Carrie mimics Claudette Colbert by showing some leg to stop a taxi.[30] The wedding scene at the end of "Heartbreaker" is a reprise of the wedding scene in It Happened One Night.[31]This film was also remade in Bollywood twice as Chori Chori starring Raj Kapoor and Nargis and Dil Hai Ki Manta Nahin starring Aamir Khan and Pooja Bhatt. The story was readapted to screen in the 2007 Kannada movie "Hudugaata" starring Golden Star Ganesh and Rekha Vedavyas. All films became successful at the box office.[citation needed]Streaming audioFebruary 22, 1934(1934-02-22)1 Plot2 Production3 Cast4 Reception

4.1 Academy Awards
4.2 American Film Institute

4.1 Academy Awards4.2 American Film Institute5 Radio adaptation6 In popular culture7 See also8 References

8.1 Notes
8.2 Bibliography

8.1 Notes8.2 Bibliography9 External links4.1 Academy Awards4.2 American Film Institute8.1 Notes8.2 BibliographyClark Gable as Peter WarneClaudette Colbert as Ellie AndrewsWalter Connolly as Alexander AndrewsRoscoe Karns as Oscar Shapeley, an annoying bus passenger who tries to pick up EllieJameson Thomas as "King" WestleyAlan Hale as DankerArthur Hoyt as ZekeBlanche Friderici as Zeke's wifeCharles C. Wilson as Joe GordonWard Bond appears early in the film in an uncredited role as a bus driver1998 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #352000 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs #82002 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions #382007 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #462008 AFI's 10 Top 10 #3 romantic comedyList of Big Five Academy Award winners and nomineesBrown, Gene. Movie Time: A Chronology of Hollywood and the Movie Industry from Its Beginnings to the Present. New York: Macmillan, 1995. ISBN 0-02-860429-6.Capra, Frank. Frank Capra, The Name Above the Title: An Autobiography. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1971. ISBN 0-306-80771-8.Chandler, Charlotte. The Girl Who Walked Home Alone: Bette Davis, A Personal Biography. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2006. ISBN 0-7432-6208.Crick, Robert Alan. The Big Screen Comedies of Mel Brooks. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company, 2009. ISBN 978-0-7864-4326-0.Harris, Warren G. Clark Gable, A Biography. London: Aurum Press, 2002. ISBN 1-85410-904-9.Hirschnor, Joel. Rating the Movie Stars for Home Video, TV and Cable. Lincolnwood, Illinois: Publications International Limited, 1983. ISBN 0-88176-152-4.Karney, Robyn. Chronicle of the Cinema, 100 Years of the Movies. London: Dorling Kindersley, 1995. ISBN 0-7513-3001-9.Kotsabilas-Davis, James and Myrna Loy. Being and Becoming. New York: Primus, Donald I. Fine Inc., 1987. ISBN 1-55611-101-0.McBride, Joseph. Frank Capra: The Catastrophe of Success. New York: Touchstone Books, 1992. ISBN 0-671-79788-3.Michael, Paul, ed. The Great Movie Book: A Comprehensive Illustrated Reference Guide to the Best-loved Films of the Sound Era. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall Inc., 1980. ISBN 0-13-363663-1.Shirer, William L. Berlin Diary: The Journal of a Foreign Correspondent 1934-1941. Edison, New Jersey: BBS Publishing Corporation, 1985. ISBN 978-0-88365-922-9.Wiley, Mason and Damien Bona. Inside Oscar: The Unofficial History of the Academy Awards. New York: Ballantine Books, 1987. ISBN 0-345-34453-7.It Happened One Night at the Internet Movie DatabaseIt Happened One Night at AllRoviIt Happened One Night at the TCM Movie DatabaseIt Happened One Night at Rotten TomatoesIt Happened One Night at Filmsite.orgIt Happened One Night at Virtual HistoryIt Happened One Night on Lux Radio Theater: March 20, 1939It Happened One Night on The Campbell Playhouse: January 28, 1940Midnight Cowboy is a 1969 American drama film based on the 1965 novel of the same name by James Leo Herlihy. It was written by Waldo Salt, directed by John Schlesinger, and stars Dustin Hoffman and newcomer Jon Voight in the title role. Notable smaller roles are filled by Sylvia Miles, John McGiver, Brenda Vaccaro, Bob Balaban, Jennifer Salt and Barnard Hughes; M. Emmet Walsh is an uncredited, pre-fame extra.The film won three Academy Awards: Best Picture, Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay. It was the first X-rated film ever to win Best Picture.[2]A young Texan named Joe Buck (Jon Voight) works as a dishwasher in a diner. As the film opens, Joe dresses himself like a rodeo cowboy, packs a suitcase, and quits his job. He heads to New York City in the hope of leading the life of a hustler.Joe's navet becomes evident as quickly as his cash disappears upon his arrival in New York. He is unsuccessful in his attempts to be hired by wealthy women. When finally successful in bedding a well-to-do middle-aged New Yorker (Sylvia Miles), Joe's attempt to collect money results in the woman breaking down in tears and Joe giving her $20 instead. Joe then meets the crippled Enrico "Ratso" Rizzo (Dustin Hoffman), a third-rate con man who easily tricks Joe out of $20 by offering to introduce him to a well-known pimp, who instead turns out to be a Bible thumper (John McGiver). Joe flees the scene in pursuit of Rizzo, who has fled the area.Joe then spends his days wandering the city and relaxing in his hotel room. Once broke, he is locked out of his hotel room for failure to pay the bill. He finally attempts to make money by agreeing to receive oral sex from a young man (Bob Balaban) in a movie theater, but this plan goes awry when the teen admits to having no money. An angry Joe threatens the teen and thinks about taking the guy's watch but then decides against this. The next day, Joe spots an unsuspecting Rizzo at a lunch counter. He angrily shakes down Rizzo for every penny he has  64 cents  but Rizzo surprisingly offers to help Joe by sharing his place, an apartment in a condemned building. Joe reluctantly accepts and they begin a "business relationship," helping each other pickpocket, steal and further attempt to get Joe hired as a gigolo. They are both completely alone without each other, and a genuine bond develops between the two men. Rizzo had a cough when the two met in the summer and, as the story progresses into winter, his health steadily worsens.The events of Joe's early life are told through fast-cutting flashbacks interspersed throughout the film. He had been to church and baptized as a boy but has only frightening memories of the experience. The two people Joe loved were his grandmother Sally Buck (Ruth White), and his onetime girlfriend, Crazy Annie (Jennifer Salt). His grandmother raised Joe after his mother abandoned him but often left him alone to go off with boyfriends; one of them, a wrangler named Woodsy Niles (Gilman Rankin), was Joe's only father figure. Annie had been a promiscuous girl who changed her ways after meeting Joe, but this did not sit well with the men of their hometown: the two were caught and raped by a gang of males. Annie was later sent to a mental institution and Joe joined the army. Sally Buck died while Joe was away serving in the Army, and Annie remains a constant presence in Joe's mind.Rizzo's backstory comes mostly through the things he tells Joe. His father was an illiterate Italian immigrant shoe shiner who worked deep in a subway station, developed a bad back, and "coughed his lungs out from breathin' in that wax all day!" Rizzo learned shining from his father but refuses to follow (such as he could, after polio crippled one leg) in the old man's footsteps. He dreams of moving one day to Miami.At one point, an odd-looking couple approach Joe and Ratso in a diner and hand Joe a flyer inviting him to a party. They enter a Warhol-esque party scene (with Warhol superstars Viva, Ultra Violet and others in cameo appearances). The naive Joe smokes a marijuana cigarette thinking it's a regular cigarette, and after taking a pill offered to him, begins to hallucinate. He leaves the party with a socialite (Brenda Vaccaro), who agrees to pay him $20 for spending the night with her. Rizzo falls down a flight of stairs as they are leaving; he insists he is fine. Joe and the socialite attempt to have sex but he suffers from temporary impotence. They play a game of scribbage together in which Joe shows his limited academic prowess. She teasingly suggests that Joe may be gay, and that does the trick. He is suddenly able to perform, and the two have lively, aggressive sex. In the morning, the socialite sets up a friend of hers to be Joe's next customer, and it appears his career is on its way.When Joe returns home later, Rizzo is in bed, sweating and feverish. He admits to Joe that he is unable to walk. Joe wants to find a doctor, but Rizzo adamantly refuses, and begs Joe to put him on a bus to Florida. A frightened Joe is determined to take care of his friend and leaves the apartment to find money. He picks up an older male customer (Barnard Hughes), but the man tries to send him away at the last minute out of guilt. Joe's desperation boils over when the man gives him a religious medallion instead of cash. He beats up and robs the man, stuffing the phone receiver into the man's mouth when Joe thinks the man is calling the hotel front desk for help.With the money, Joe buys two bus tickets to Florida. During the long journey, Rizzo's frail physical condition deteriorates further. At a rest stop, Joe touchingly buys bright new clothing for Rizzo and himself. He throws away his cowboy outfit and admits, "I ain't no kinda hustler." As they reach Florida and near Miami, Joe talks about getting a regular job, only to realize that Rizzo has died in the seat beside him. After Joe informs the bus driver, the driver tells him that there is nothing else to do but continue on to Miami. The film ends with Joe seated with his arm around his dead friend.The opening scenes were filmed in Big Spring, Texas. A roadside billboard stating "IF YOU DON'T HAVE AN OIL WELL...GET ONE!" was shown while the New York-bound bus carrying Joe Buck rolled through Texas.[3] Such advertisements, which were common in the Southwestern United States during the late-1960s and throughout the 1970s, promoted Eddie Chiles' Western Company of North America.[4]Joe first realizes that the bus was soon approaching New York when he heard a Ron Lundy broadcast on WABC while listening to his portable radio.[5] At the time the movie was being filmed in 1968, Lundy worked the midday shift (10 AM1 PM) Monday through Saturday at the radio station.[6]Joe stayed at the Hotel Claridge, which was located at the southeast corner of Broadway and West 44th Street in Midtown Manhattan. His room overlooked the northern half of Times Square.[7] The building, designed by D. H. Burnham & Company and opened in 1911, has since been demolished.[8]A motif that was featured three times throughout the New York part of the movie was the sign at the top of the facade of the Mutual of New York (MONY) Building.[3] It was extended into the scribbage scene with Shirley the socialite when Joe's incorrect spelling of the word "money" matched that on the signage.[9]Despite his portrayal of Joe Buck, a character hopelessly out of his element in New York, Jon Voight is a native New Yorker, hailing from Yonkers. Dustin Hoffman, who played a grizzled veteran of New York's streets, is actually from Los Angeles.The line "I'm walkin' here!", which reached #27 on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes, is often said to have been improvised, but producer Jerome Hellman disputes this account on the 2-disc DVD set of Midnight Cowboy. The cab was driven by a hired actor during a scripted take, and the production team filmed it to look like an ad-lib.[citation needed] However, Hoffman told it differently on an installment of Bravo's Inside the Actors Studio. He stated that there were many takes to hit that traffic light just right so they didn't have to pause while walking. That take, the timing was perfect and the cab came out of nowhere and nearly hit them. Hoffman wanted to say "We're filming a movie here!", but he decided not to ruin the take.[10]Upon initial review by the Motion Picture Association of America, Midnight Cowboy received a "Restricted" ("R") rating (Persons under 16 not admitted unless accompanied by parent or adult guardian). However, after consulting with a psychologist, executives at United Artists were told to accept an "X" rating (Persons under 17 will not be admitted) due to the "homosexual frame of reference" and its "possible influence upon youngsters". The film was released with an X.[11]The film won Academy Awards for Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Adapted Screenplay; it is the only X-rated film to win an Oscar in any category, and one of two X-rated films to be nominated for an Oscar (the other being Stanley Kubrick's 1971 film A Clockwork Orange). Both Hoffman and Voight were nominated for Best Actor awards and Sylvia Miles was nominated for Best Supporting Actress, in what is one of the shortest performances ever nominated (clocking in approximately five minutes of screen-time).There was controversy from critics who felt the MPAA "X" rating for the film was too harsh. The film had also won major awards. The MPAA later broadened the requirements for the "R" rating to allow more content, and in addition raised the age restriction from sixteen to seventeen. The film was later rated "R" for a reissue in 1971 with no edits made. The R rating for the film remains to this day.[11][12]The film won six BAFTA Awards. It was also entered into the 19th Berlin International Film Festival.[13][14]This film was Adam Holender's first cinematography assignment; he was recommended to Schlesinger by Holender's childhood friend, filmmaker Roman Polanski.[15]In 1994, this film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.The soundtrack features songs of Elephant's Memory, Warren Zevon, Randy Newman and Harry Nilsson.John Barry, who supervised the music and composed the score for the film, won a Grammy for Best Instrumental Theme. Fred Neil's song "Everybody's Talkin'" also won a Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance, for Harry Nilsson.Schlesinger chose the song "Everybody's Talkin'" (written by Fred Neil and performed by Harry Nilsson) as its theme, and the song underscores the entire first act of the film. (Other songs considered for the film included Nilsson's own "I Guess the Lord Must Be in New York City," and Randy Newman's "Cowboy.") The song "He Quit Me" was also on the soundtrack, performed by Lesley Miller; it was written by Warren Zevon, who also included it (as "She Quit Me") on his debut album Wanted Dead or Alive.May 25, 1969(1969-05-25)1 Plot summary2 Cast3 Production4 Awards and honors5 Soundtrack6 References7 External linksDustin Hoffman as Enrico Salvatore "Ratso" RizzoJon Voight as Joe BuckSylvia Miles as CassJohn McGiver as Mr. O'DanielBrenda Vaccaro as ShirleyBarnard Hughes as TownyRuth White as Sally BuckJennifer Salt as AnnieViva as GretelBob Balaban as Young StudentOfficial websiteMidnight Cowboy at the Internet Movie DatabaseMidnight Cowboy at Rotten TomatoesLiner notes from the original Criterion LaserdiscThe Best Years of Our Lives is a 1946 American drama film directed by William Wyler and starring Fredric March, Myrna Loy, Dana Andrews, Teresa Wright, Virginia Mayo, and Harold Russell. The film is about three United States servicemen trying to piece their lives back together after coming home from World War II. Samuel Goldwyn was inspired to produce a film about veterans after reading an August 7, 1944 article in Time about the difficulties experienced by men returning to civilian life. Goldwyn hired former war correspondent MacKinlay Kantor to write a screenplay. His work was first published as a novella, Glory for Me, which Kantor wrote in blank verse.[2][3] Robert Sherwood then adapted the novella as a screenplay.[3]The Best Years of Our Lives won seven Academy Awards in 1946, including Best Picture, Best Director (William Wyler), Best Actor (Fredric March), Best Supporting Actor (Harold Russell), Best Film Editing (Daniel Mandell), Best Adapted Screenplay (Robert Sherwood), and Best Original Score (Hugo Friedhofer).[4] In addition to its critical success, the film quickly became a great commercial success upon release. It became the highest-grossing film in both the United States and UK since the release of Gone with the Wind. It remains the sixth most-attended film of all time in the UK, with over 20 million tickets sold.[5] The film had one of the highest viewing figures of all time, with ticket sales exceeding $20.4 million.[6]After World War II, Fred Derry (Dana Andrews), Homer Parrish (Harold Russell), and Al Stephenson (Fredric March) meet while flying home to Boone City (a fictional city patterned after Cincinnati, Ohio.[2]). Fred was a decorated Army Air Forces captain and bombardier with the Eighth Air Force in Europe who still suffers from nightmares of combat. Homer lost both hands from burns suffered when his aircraft carrier was sunk, and now uses mechanical hook prostheses. Al served as an infantry platoon sergeant in the 25th Infantry Division in the Pacific.Before the war, Al was a bank loan officer. He is a mature man with a comfortable home and a loving family: wife Milly (Myrna Loy), adult daughter Peggy (Teresa Wright), and college freshman son Rob. Al has trouble readjusting to civilian life, as do his two new acquaintances, and is showing signs of alcoholism. Shortly after returning home, Al is persuaded to return to the bank (with a promotion and raise). The bank president views Al's military experience as valuable in dealing with other vets who are returning to civilian life, and may seek loans from the bank. Al soon realizes the narrow tightrope that he's walking, when he approves a loan (without collateral) to a young Navy vet who wishes to purchase land for a farm, and is soon forced to explain to the bank president why he made the approval. Later, at a banquet held by the bank officers in his honor, a slightly inebriated Al manages to eloquently articulate, with some rambling, his belief that the bank (and America) must stand with the vets who risked everything to defend the country, and give them every chance possible to rebuild their lives back home.Before the war, Fred had been an unskilled drugstore soda jerk. He wants something better, but the tight postwar job market forces him to reluctantly return to his old job. Fred had met Marie (Virginia Mayo) while in flight training and married her shortly afterward, before shipping out less than a month later. Marie became a nightclub waitress while Fred was overseas. Marie seems to have been largely enamored of Fred when he was an aviator, and now does not enjoy being married to a soda jerk.Homer was a football quarterback and became engaged to Wilma (Cathy O'Donnell) before joining the Navy. Both Homer and his parents now have trouble dealing with his disability. He does not want to burden Wilma with his handicap and so pushes her away, although she adjusts best to his changed life, and still wants to marry him.Peggy meets Fred while bringing her father home from a bar where the three men meet once again. They are attracted to each other, and Peggy dislikes Marie, finding her shallow. Peggy tells her parents she intends to end Fred and Marie's marriage, but they tell her that their own marriage overcame similar problems. In order to protect Peggy, Al demands that Fred to stop seeing his daughter. Fred agrees, but the friendship between the two men becomes strained.At Fred's drugstore an obnoxious customer, who says that the war was fought against the wrong enemies, gets into a fight with Homer. Fred intervenes to protect his friend, and knocks the man into a glass counter. Having lost his job, Fred and Homer leave the drugstore. Later, Fred encourages Homer to put his misgivings behind and marry Wilma, offering to be his best man if he needs one. Arriving home, Fred discovers his wife with another veteran (Steve Cochran). Marie confronts Fred and tells him that she thinks he is a flop and that she is getting a divorce.Fred decides to leave town, and gives his father his medals and citations, saying that they were "passed out with the K-rations." His father tries to persuade Fred to stay and start a new life on his home turf. After Fred leaves, his father is nearly brought to tears when reading the citation for Fred's Distinguished Flying Cross, and learns for the first time what a hero his son truly had been. At the airport, Fred books space on the first outbound aircraft, without regard for the destination. While waiting, he wanders into a vast aircraft boneyard. Inside the nose of a B-17, he begins to relive and purge himself of the intense memories of combat. The boss of a work crew interrupts him. When the crew chief says the aluminum from the aircraft is being salvaged to build housing, Fred persuades the boss to hire him.At home, one evening, Wilma visits Homer and tells him that her parents want her to leave Boone City for an extended period, to try and forget him. Torn between wanting her to stay, but not wishing to be a burden to her were she to live with him in his condition, Homer bluntly demonstrates to Wilma how hard life with him would be. When Wilma makes it clear that she loves him anyway, Homer gives in and agrees to marry her.The story concludes on the day of Homer and Wilma's wedding, in the Parrish home. True to his word, the now-divorced Fred is Homer's best man at the wedding. Al and Fred meet for the first time after their confrontation in Butch's over his relationship with Peggy; and despite Al's friendly overtures, Fred remains cool. During the ceremony, Fred and Peggy watch each other tentatively from across the room. After the ceremony, Fred becomes convinced that he has to put the past behind him and build a new life. He approaches Peggy and holds her, telling her that it might be years before their lives become comfortable. She smiles, and they kiss and embrace.Casting brought together established stars as well as character actors and relative unknowns. Famed drummer Gene Krupa was seen in archival footage, while Tennessee Ernie Ford, later a famous television star, appeared as an uncredited "hillbilly singer" (in the first of his only three film appearances). At the time the film was shot, Ford was unknown as a singer. He worked in San Bernardino as a radio announcer-disc jockey. Blake Edwards, later notable as a film producer and director, appeared fleetingly as an uncredited "Corporal". Actress Judy Wyler was cast in her first role in her father's production.Additional uncredited cast members include Mary Arden, Al Bridge, Harry Cheshire, Joyce Compton, Heinie Conklin, Clancy Cooper, Claire Du Brey, Tom Dugan, Edward Earle, Billy Engle, Pat Flaherty, Stuart Holmes, John Ince, Teddy Infuhr, Robert Karnes, Joe Palma, Leo Penn, Jack Rice, Suzanne Ridgeway, Ralph Sanford and John Tyrrell.[7]Director William Wyler had flown combat missions over Europe in filming Memphis Belle (1944) and worked hard to get accurate depictions of the combat veterans he had encountered. Wheeler changed the original casting that had featured a veteran suffering from posttraumatic stress disorder and sought out Harold Russell, a non-actor to take on the exacting role of Homer Parrish.[8]For The Best Years of Our Lives, he asked the principal actors to purchase their own clothes, in order to connect with daily life and produce an authentic feeling. Other Wyler touches included constructing life-size sets, which went against the standard larger sets that were more suited to camera positions. The impact for the audience was immediate, as each scene played out in a realistic, natural way.[8]The movie began filming on April 15, 1946 at a variety of locations, including the Los Angeles County Arboretum and Botanic Garden, Ontario International Airport, Ontario, California, Raleigh Studios, Hollywood and the Samuel Goldwyn/Warner Hollywood Studios.[8] Many scenes were also filmed in Phoenixville, PA, most notably the banking scenes using the Farmers and Mechanics Bank located on Main Street and various other scenes showing Bridge Street and Main Street in Phoenixville, PA. The Best Years of Our Lives is notable for cinematographer Gregg Toland's use of deep focus photography, in which objects both close to and distant from the camera are in sharp focus.[9] For the passage of Fred Derry's reliving a combat mission while sitting in the remains of a former bomber, Wyler used "zoom" effects to simulate an aircraft's taking off.[10]The "Jackson High" football stadium seen early in the movie in aerial footage was Corcoran Stadium, the home of Xavier University's (Cincinnati) football team from 1929 to 1973.After the war, the combat aircraft featured in the film were being destroyed and disassembled for reuse as scrap material. The scene of Derry's walking among aircraft ruins was filmed at the Ontario Army Air Field in Ontario, California. The former training facility had been converted into a scrap yard, housing nearly 2,000 former combat aircraft in various states of disassembly and reclamation.[8]Big-band jazz drummer Gene Krupa briefly appears in a montage of nightclub performers.Upon its release, the film received extremely positive reviews from critics. Shortly after its premiere at the Astor Theater, New York, Bosley Crowther, film critic for The New York Times, hailed the film as a masterpiece. He wrote,He also said the ensemble casting gave the "'best' performance in this best film this year from Hollywood."A present-day critic, Dave Kehr, wrote,David Thomson offers tempered praise: "I would concede that Best Years is decent and humane... acutely observed, despite being so meticulous a package. It would have taken uncommon genius and daring at that time to sneak a view of an untidy or unresolved America past Goldwyn or the public."[12] Manny Farber called it "a horse-drawn truckload of liberal schmaltz."[13][14]In July 2010, the film has a 97% "Fresh" rating at Rotten Tomatoes, based on 36 reviews.[15] The film enjoys a 100% "Fresh" rating on the site's "Top Critics" section, based on 8 reviews. Chicago Sun Times film critic Roger Ebert put the film on his "Great Movies" list in 2007, calling it "...modern, lean, and honest."[16]The film was a massive popular success. When box office prices are adjusted for inflation, it remains one of the top 100 grossing films in U.S. history. Among films released before 1950, only Gone With the Wind, The Bells of St. Mary's and four Disney titles have done more total business, in part due to later re-releases. (Reliable box office figures for certain early films such as Birth of a Nation and Charlie Chaplin's comedies are unavailable.) [17]1947 Academy Awards
The film received seven Academy Awards. Fredric March won his second Best Actor award (after winning in 1932 for Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde). (Dana Andrews' brilliant performance turned out to be overshadowed by the acclaim Fredric March and Harold Russell received.)Despite his Oscar-nominated performance, Harold Russell was not a professional actor. As the Academy Board of Governors considered him a long shot to win, they gave him an honorary award "for bringing hope and courage to his fellow veterans through his appearance". When Russell won Best Supporting Actor, there was an enthusiastic response. He is the only actor to have received two Academy Awards for the same performance. He later sold one of the awards at auction for $60,000, to pay his wife's medical bills.[18]1947 Golden Globe Awards1948 BAFTA AwardsOther winsIn 1989, the National Film Registry selected it for preservation in the United States Library of Congress as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."American Film Institute recognitionStreaming audioNovember 21, 1946(1946-11-21)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception5 Awards and honors6 References

6.1 Notes
6.2 Bibliography

6.1 Notes6.2 Bibliography7 External links6.1 Notes6.2 BibliographyMyrna Loy as Milly StephensonFredric March as Sergeant First Class Al StephensonDana Andrews as Captain Fred DerryTeresa Wright as Peggy StephensonVirginia Mayo as Marie DerryCathy O'Donnell as Wilma CameronHoagy Carmichael as Uncle ButchHarold Russell as Petty Officer 2nd Class Homer ParrishGladys George as Hortense DerryRoman Bohnen as Pat DerryRay Collins as Mr. MiltonMinna Gombell as Mrs. ParrishWalter Baldwin as Mr. ParrishSteve Cochran as CliffDorothy Adams as Mrs. CameronDon Beddoe as Mr. CameronMarlene Aames as Luella ParrishCharles Halton as PrewRay Teal as Mr. MollettHowland Chamberlain as ThorpeDean White as NovakErskine Sanford as BullardMichael Hall as Rob StephensonVictor Cutler as WoodyWon: Best Dramatic Motion PictureWon: Special Award for Best Non-Professional Acting - Harold RussellWon: BAFTA Award for Best Film from any SourceNational Board of Review: NBR Award Best Director, William Wyler; 1946.New York Film Critics Circle Awards: NYFCC Award Best Director, William Wyler; Best Film; 1946.Bodil Awards: Bodil; Best American Film, William Wyler; 1948.Cinema Writers Circle Awards, Spain: CEC Award; Best Foreign Film, USA; 1948.1998 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #372006 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers #112007 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #37Dolan, Edward F. Jr. Hollywood Goes to War. London: Bison Books, 1985. ISBN 0-86124-229-7.Flood, Richard. "Reel crank - critic Manny Farber." Artforum, Volume 37, Issue 1, September 1998. ISSN 0004-3532.Hardwick, Jack and Ed Schnepf. "A Viewer's Guide to Aviation Movies", in The Making of the Great Aviation Films. General Aviation Series, Volume 2, 1989.Kinn, Gail and Jim Piazza. The Academy Awards: The Complete Unofficial History. New York: Black Dog & Leventhal, 2008. ISBN 978-1-57912-772-5.Orriss, Bruce. When Hollywood Ruled the Skies: The Aviation Film Classics of World War II. Hawthorn, California: Aero Associates Inc., 1984. ISBN 0-9613088-0-X.Thomson, David. "Wyler, William". A Biographical Dictionary of Film. London: Little, Brown, 2002. ISBN 0-316-85905-2.The Best Years of Our Lives at the Internet Movie Database.The Best Years of Our Lives at AllRovi.The Best Years of Our Lives at the TCM Movie Database.The Best Years of Our Lives at Rotten TomatoesThe Best Years of Our Lives detailed synopsis/analysis at Film Site by Tim Dirks.The Best Years of Our Lives film article at Reel Classics. Includes MP3s.The Best Years of Our Lives at the Golden Years web site.The Best Years of Our Lives on Screen Guild Theater: November 24, 1947The Best Years of Our Lives on Screen Directors Playhouse: April 17, 1949Double Indemnity is a 1944 American film noir, directed by Billy Wilder, co-written by Wilder and Raymond Chandler, and produced by Buddy DeSylva and Joseph Sistrom. The script was based on James M. Cain's 1943 novella of the same title which originally appeared as an eight-part serial in Liberty magazine.The film stars Fred MacMurray as an insurance salesman, Barbara Stanwyck as a provocative housewife who wishes her husband were dead, and Edward G. Robinson as a claims adjuster whose job is to find phony claims. The term double indemnity refers to a clause in certain life insurance policies that doubles the payout in cases when death is caused by accidental means.Praised by many critics when first released, Double Indemnity was nominated for seven Academy Awards but did not win any. Widely regarded as a classic, it is often cited as a paradigmatic film noir and as having set the standard for the films that followed in that genre.Deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the U.S. Library of Congress in 1992, Double Indemnity was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. In 1998, it was ranked #38 on the American Film Institute's list of the 100 best American films of the 20th century, and in 2007 it was 29th on their 10th Anniversary list.Walter Neff (Fred MacMurray), a successful insurance salesman for Pacific All Risk, returns to his office building in downtown Los Angeles late one night. He is clearly in pain as he sits down at his desk and begins dictating a memo into a Dictaphone machine for colleague Barton Keyes (Edward G. Robinson), a claims adjuster. The dictation becomes the story of the film, which is told in flashback:Neff first meets the alluring Phyllis Dietrichson (Barbara Stanwyck) during a routine house call to renew an automobile insurance policy for her husband. A flirtation develops, at least until Phyllis asks how she could take out a policy on her husband's life without his knowing it. Neff realizes she is contemplating murder, and he wants no part of it.Phyllis pursues Neff to his own home, though, and ups the ante  or at least the voltage  of her flirtation; Neff's gullibility and libido quickly overcome his caution, and he agrees that the two of them, together, will kill her husband. Neff knows all the tricks of his trade, of course, and comes up with a plan in which Phyllis's husband will die an unlikely death, in this case falling from a moving train. The "accidental" nature of his demise will trigger the "double indemnity" clause of the policy, forcing Pacific All Risk to pay the widow twice the normal amount.The couple carry out their plan. Neff hides in the back seat of the car that Phyllis is driving, and kills Mr. Dietrichson. Neff, escorted by Phyllis, then boards the train, pretending to be her husband on a trip to Palo Alto for a college reunion. He uses a pair of crutches because Dietrichson has recently broken a leg. He also identifies himself as Dietrichson to a passenger from Oregon he encounters after the train pulls out of the station. Neff jumps off, safely, and he and Phyllis place Dietrichson's body on the tracks. Phyllis drives Neff home.Mr. Norton, the company's chief, believes the death was suicide and is prepared to settle with Phyllis; but, Investigator Keyes dissuades him by quoting statistics indicating the improbability of suicide, to Neff's initial delight.Keyes does not suspect foul play at first, but the "little man" in his chest keeps nagging that all is not right with this case. He eventually concludes that the Dietrichson woman and some unknown accomplice must be behind the husband's death. He has no reason to be suspicious of Neff, a colleague he has worked with for quite some time and actually views with considerable paternal affection.Keyes, however, is not Neff's only worry. The victim's daughter, Lola (Jean Heather), comes to him, convinced that stepmother Phyllis is behind her father's death: it seems Lola's mother also died under suspicious circumstances  while Phyllis was her nurse. Neff's concern goes beyond his fear that Lola might blow the whistle on the murder; he is not such a heel that he doesn't begin to care about what might happen to the girl, whose parents have both been murdered.Keyes, now suspecting Dietrichson was murdered, is prepared to reject the claim and force Mrs. Dietrichson to sue in order to expose her. Neff warns Phyllis not to sue and admits he has been talking to Lola about her past.Then he learns Phyllis is seeing Lola's boyfriend Nino behind her  and his own  back. Phyllis's brazen unfaithfulness helps wake Neff from his romantic haze and he wants to save himself from his dire involvement with her and with murder. He reasons that the only way out is to make the police think Phyllis and Nino did the murder, which is what the tenacious Keyes now believes anyway.Neff and Phyllis meet at her house and she tells him she has been seeing Nino only to provoke him into killing the suspicious Lola in a jealous rage. Neff is now wholly disgusted and is about to kill Phyllis when she shoots him first. Badly wounded but still standing, he advances on her, taunting her to shoot again. She does not shoot and he takes the gun from her. She says she never loved him "until a minute ago, when I couldn't fire that second shot." Neff coldly says he does not believe her; she tries hugging him tightly but then pulls away and looks pleadingly at him when she feels the gun pressed against her side. Neff says "Goodbye, baby," then shoots twice and kills her.Outside, Neff hides in the bushes and intercepts Nino as he approaches, ostensibly to visit his lover, Phyllis. Neff advises him to not enter the house, but to leave and contact "the woman who truly loves you"  Lola. Nino agrees and heads out, avoiding what would have been damning evidence against him if he'd entered the murder house.Neff, gravely injured, drives to his office, seats himself at the Dictaphone, and starts explaining. Keyes arrives in mid-confession and hears enough to understand everything. Neff tells Keyes he is going to Mexico rather than face a death sentence  but sags to the floor before he can reach the elevator. Keyes comforts him and sadly says, "Walter, you're all washed up." Looking up at Keyes, Neff says the reason Keyes couldn't solve the case was because Neff was "too close" as a fellow employee. Keyes tells Neff he was "closer than that." Neff responds, "I love you too," and puts a cigarette in his mouth. Neff is unable to light the match with his thumb, as he has done throughout the film, so Keyes lights it with his.James M. Cain based his novella on a 1927 murder perpetrated by a married Queens, New York woman and her lover whose trial he attended while working as a journalist in New York.[2] In that crime, Ruth Snyder persuaded her boyfriend, Judd Gray, to kill her husband Albert after having him take out a big insurance policy  with a double-indemnity clause.[3] The murderers were quickly identified, arrested and convicted. The front page photo of Snyder's execution in the electric chair at Sing Sing has been called the most famous newsphoto of the 1920s.[4]Double Indemnity began making the rounds in Hollywood shortly after it was published in Liberty magazine in 1935. Cain had already made a name for himself the year before with The Postman Always Rings Twice, a story of murder and passion between a migrant worker and the unhappy wife of a caf owner. Cain's agent sent copies of the novella to all the major studios and within days, MGM, Warner Bros., Paramount, 20th Century-Fox, and Columbia were all competing to buy the rights for $25,000. Then a letter went out from Joseph Breen at the Hays Office, and the studios withdrew their bids as one. In it Breen warned:The general low tone and sordid flavor of this story makes it, in our judgment, thoroughly unacceptable for screen presentation before mixed audiences in the theater. I am sure you will agree that it is most importantto avoid what the code calls "the hardening of audiences," especially those who are young and impressionable, to the thought and fact of crime.[5]Eight years later Double Indemnity was included in a collection of Cain's works entitled Three of a Kind. Paramount executive Joseph Sistrom thought the material would be perfect for Wilder and they bought the rights for $15,000.[6] Paramount resubmitted the script to the Hays Office, but the response was nearly identical to the one eight years earlier. Wilder, Paramount executive William Dozier, and Sistrom decided to move forward anyway. They submitted a film treatment crafted by Wilder and his writing partner Charles Brackett,[7] and this time the Hays Office approved the project with only a few objections: the portrayal of the disposal of the body, a proposed gas-chamber execution scene, and the skimpiness of the towel worn by the female lead in her first scene.[8]Cain forever after maintained that Joseph Breen owed him $10,000 for vetoing the property back in 1935 when he would have received $25,000.[9]After Paramount purchased the rights to the novella for Wilder, the next step was a screenplay. The material was widely regarded around Hollywood as unfilmable due its iniquitous characters and the restrictions imposed by the Code. Although he had worked on the treatment, tweedy Charles Brackett decided it was too sordid for his uppercrust sensibilities and bowed out of the project, leaving Wilder to find another collaborator. His first choice, James M. Cain himself, was already working for another studio and unavailable (although Cain claimed he was never asked).[10] Producer Joseph Sistrom, an avid reader and an admirer of The Big Sleep, then suggested Raymond Chandler.Wilder would later recall with disappointment his first meeting with Chandler. Envisioning a former private detective who had worked his own experiences into gritty prose, he instead met a man he would later describe as looking like an accountant. Chandler was new to Hollywood, but saw it as a golden opportunity. Not realizing that he would be collaborating with Wilder, he demanded $1000 and said he would need at least a week to complete the screenplay, to which Wilder and Sistrom simply looked at one another in amazement. After the first weekend, Chandler presented eighty pages that Wilder characterized as "useless camera instruction";[11] Wilder quickly put it aside and informed Chandler that they would be working together, slowly and meticulously. By all accounts, the pair did not get along during their four months together. At one point Chandler even quit, submitting a long list of grievances to Paramount as to why he could no longer work with Wilder. Wilder, however, stuck it out, admiring Chandler's gift with words and knowing that his dialogue would translate very well to the screen.[2]Initially, Wilder and Chandler had intended to retain as much of Cains original dialogue as possible. It was Chandler, ironically, who first realized that the dialogue from the novella would not translate well to the screen. Wilder disagreed and was annoyed that Chandler was not putting more of it into the script. To settle it, Wilder hired a couple of contract players from the studio to read passages of Cains original dialogue aloud. To Wilder's astonishment, Chandler was right and, in the end, the movies cynical and provocative dialogue was more Chandler and Wilder than it was Cain.[12] Chandler also did a lot of fieldwork while working on the script and took large volumes of notes. By visiting various locations that figured into the film, he was able to bring a sense of realism about Los Angeles that seeped into the script. For example, he hung around Jerry's Market on Melrose Avenue in preparation for the scene where Phyllis and Walter would disceetly meet to plan the murder.[13]The tumultuous relationship between Wilder and Chandler only enhanced the product of their collaboration. Wilder, in fact, believed that discord, a tug-of-war, was a vital ingredient necessary for a fruitful collaboration: "If two people think alike," he once said, "it's like two men pulling at one end of a rope. If you are going to collaborate, you need an opponent to bounce things off of."[14] His tugging with Chandler did have a softer side, it seems: over 60 years after the film's initial release, it was discovered that Chandler had agreed to appear in a fleeting cameo at 16:12 into the film, glancing up from a book as Neff walks past in the hallway. This is notable because, other than a snippet from a home movie, there is no other footage of Chandler known anywhere.[15]When Chandler came to work with Wilder he was already a recovering alcoholic. As Wilder noted, "He was in Alcoholics Anonymous, and I think he had a tough time with me  I drove him back into drinking...".[16] By the time the picture was released, Chandler was thoroughly disillusioned with the writers' lot in Hollywood; he published an angry piece titled "Writers in Hollywood" for The Atlantic Monthly in November 1945 in which he complained, "The first picture I worked on was nominated for an Academy Award (if that means anything), but I was not even invited to the press review held right in the studio." He neglected, however, to mention that the studio had kept him on salary during the eight-week shooting schedule and that no changes to the script were allowed without his approval  a very rare accommodation for screenwriters, particularly newcomers, in those days.[17] Offended, Wilder responded by saying, "We didn't invite him? How could we? He was under the table drunk at Lucy's," a nearby watering hole for Paramount employees. This relationship with Chandler is what drew Wilder to his next project, the Best Picture-winning The Lost Weekend, about an alcoholic writer. Wilder made the film, in part, "to explain Chandler to himself."[2]Cain himself was very pleased with the way his book turned out on the screen. After seeing the picture half a dozen times he was quoted as saying, " ... It's the only picture I ever saw made from my books that had things in it I wish I had thought of. Wilder's ending was much better than my ending, and his device for letting the guy tell the story by taking out the office dictating machine  I would have done it if I had thought of it."[18]Wilder's and Brackett's estrangement during Double Indemnity was not a permanent one. Years later Wilder would characterize their time apart as just another kind of adultery: "1944 was 'The Year of Infidelities,'" he said. "Charlie produced The Uninvited...I wrote Double Indemnity with Raymond Chandler... I don't think he ever forgave me. He always thought I cheated on him with Raymond Chandler." Brackett spun the breakup in a decidedly different light, saying, "Billy got so despondent at being without me that we did The Lost Weekend, a depressing film about a writer who has trouble writing."[19] Lost Weekend was a distinguished offspring for the reconciled couple  they left Oscar night with three Awards: Best Picture for producer Brackett, Best Director for Wilder, and a shared pair of statuettes for both for Best Screenplay. They worked together through Sunset Boulevard in 1950, then split for good.Having the two protagonists mortally wound each other was one of the key factors in gaining Hays Office approval for the script: the Production Code demanded that criminals pay, on screen, for their transgressions. In addition, Double Indemnity broke new cinematic ground on several fronts, one of those being the first time a Hollywood film explicitly explored the means, motives, and opportunity of committing a murder.[20] It would take skillful performers to bring nuance to these treacherous characters, and casting the roles of Walter Neff and Phyllis Dietrichson would be a challenge for Wilder.Sistrom and Wilder's first choice for the role of Phyllis Dietrichson was Barbara Stanwyck. At the time, Stanwyck was not only the highest paid actress in Hollywood, but the highest paid woman in America.[2] (Her eventual co-star MacMurray matched Stanwyck's prominence at the pay window: in 1943, he was the highest paid actor in Hollywood, and the fourth highest-paid American.[21]) Given the nature of the role, Stanwyck was reluctant to take the part, fearing it would have an adverse effect on her career. According to Stanwyck,I said, "I love the script and I love you, but I am a little afraid after all these years of playing heroines to go into an out-and-out killer." And Mr. Wilder  and rightly so  looked at me and he said, "Well, are you a mouse or an actress?" And I said, "Well, I hope I'm an actress." He said, "Then do the part". And I did and I'm very grateful to him.[22]The character of Walter Neff was not only a heel, he was a weak and malleable heel  many Hollywood actors including Alan Ladd, James Cagney, Spencer Tracy, Gregory Peck, and Frederic March passed on it.[23] Wilder even recalls "scraping the bottom of the barrel" and approaching George Raft. Raft was illiterate, so Wilder had to tell him the plot. About halfway through, Raft interrupted him with, "Let's get to the lapel bit." "What lapel bit?" a bewildered Wilder replied. "The lapel," the actor said, annoyed by such stupidity. "You know, when the guy flashes his lapel, you see his badge, you know he's a detective." This was his vision of the film, and since it wasn't part of the story, Raft turned the part down.[24] Wilder finally realized that the part should be played by someone who could not only be a cynic, but a nice guy as well.[23]Fred MacMurray was accustomed to playing "happy-go-lucky good guys" in light comedies, and when Wilder first approached him about the Neff role, MacMurray said, "You're making the mistake of your life!" Playing a serious role required acting, he said, "and I can't do it."[25] But Wilder pestered him about it every single day  at home, in the studio commissary, in his dressing room, on the sidewalk  until he simply wore the actor down. MacMurray felt safe about his acquiescence since Paramount, who had him under contract and had carefully crafted his good guy image, would never let him play a "wrong" role.[26] His trust, however, was misplaced: his contract was up for renewal at the time, and ever since his friend and co-star, Carole Lombard, had shrewdly and successfully taught him how to play hardball with the studio bosses, he wasn't the pliable pushover of old. Paramount executives decided to let him play the unsavory role to teach him a lesson. A lesson was indeed taught, but not the one Paramount had in mind.[27] MacMurray made a great heel and his performance demonstrated new breadths of his acting talent. "I never dreamed it would be the best picture I ever made," he said.[28]Edward G. Robinson was also reluctant to sign on for the role of Barton Keyes, but not for the same reasons as MacMurray and Stanwyck. Having been a star since Little Caesar in 1930, this role represented a step downward to the third lead. Robinson would later admit, "At my age, it was time to begin thinking of character roles, to slide into middle and old age with the same grace as that marvelous actor Lewis Stone". It also helped, as he freely admitted, that he would draw the same salary as the two leads, for fewer shooting days.[22]The original ending to the Cain novella called for the characters to commit double suicide. Suicide, however, was strictly forbidden at the time by the Hays Production Code as a way to resolve a plot, so Wilder wrote and filmed a different ending in which Neff goes to the gas chamber while Keyes watches. This scene was shot before the scenes that eventually became the film's familiar ending, and once that final intimate exchange between Neff and Keyes revealed its power to Wilder, he began to wonder if the gas chamber ending was needed at all. "You couldn't have a more meaningful scene between two men", Wilder said.[29] As he would later recount, "The story was between the two guys. I knew it, even though I had already filmed the gas chamber scene... So we just took out the scene in the gas chamber,"[30] despite its $150,000 cost to the studio.[29] Removal of the scene, over Chandler's objection,[28] also removed the Hays Office's single biggest remaining objection to the picture, since they regarded it as "unduly gruesome" and predicted that it would never be approved by local and regional censor boards.[31] The footage and sound elements are lost, but production stills of the scene still exist.The look of the film was achieved through the work of cinematographer John F. Seitz. At the time, Seitz was the premiere director of photography on the Paramount lot; his work extended all the way back to the silent era. Wilder had worked with Seitz on his previous film, Five Graves to Cairo, in which Seitz was nominated for an Academy Award and Wilder praised Seitz's willingness to experiment and fail.[32] Here Wilder taps into his 1920s Berlin roots, and he and Seitz give the film a look subtly reminiscent of German expressionism, with dramatic deployment of light and shadows.[33] "He was ready for anything," Wilder said. "Sometimes the rushes were so dark that you couldn't see anything. He went to the limits of what could be done."[34] They would contrast the bright sunny Southern California exteriors, shot on location, with dark, gloomy, rotten interiors shot on soundstages to give the audience a sense of what lurks just beneath the facade  and just who is capable of murder.[2] The contrast was heightened, in Wilder's words, by "dirtying up" the sets. Once the set was ready for filming, Wilder would go around and overturn a few ashtrays to give the house an appropriately grubby look. Wilder and Seitz also blew aluminum particles into the air so that, as they floated down, they looked just like dust.[35]Another technique Seitz used was "venetian blind" lighting which almost gives the illusion of prison bars trapping the characters. Barbara Stanwyck later reflected, "...and for an actress, let me tell you the way those sets were lit, the house, Walters apartment, those dark shadows, those slices of harsh light at strange angles  all that helped my performance. The way Billy staged it and John Seitz lit it, it was all one sensational mood."[36]For Neff's office at Pacific All Risk, Wilder and set designer Hal Pereira conspired to create a little in-house joke, typical of Billy Wilder. In the opening scenes, as Walter Neff stumbles off the elevator on his way to his office to record his confession, the vast two-tiered office is empty and dark. With the camera following him, Neff lurches towards the balcony railing overlooking rows and rows of uniform corporate desks. Neff turns left, but the camera continues forward until it reaches the brink and stares down for an anxious moment into a colorless American business purgatory. Here, Pereira is said to have copied an existing office: the corporate headquarters of Paramount Pictures in New York City.[37][38]Wilder also decked Stanwyck out in the blonde wig "to complement her anklet...and to make her look as sleazy as possible."[22] This wig has been cited by some as being the picture's biggest flaw claiming that it looks too fake.[2] According to Wilder, this was exactly what he was going for when he chose the wig wanting to project, "the phoniness of the girl  Bad taste, phony wig," with cheap perfume to match.[39] Unconvinced, Paramount production head Buddy DeSylva was overheard to say, "We hired Barbara Stanwyck, and here we get George Washington."[22]The production was not without its lucky accidents: The company had just finished shooting the final segment of the sequence where Phyllis and Walter make their getaway after dumping their victim's body on the tracks. The crew was breaking for lunch before striking the set. In the script, the pair get in their car and simply drive away. But as Wilder got into his own car to leave, it wouldn't start. Inspired, he ran back and ordered the crew back. Wilder reshot the scene, only this time as Phyllis starts the car, the motor stalls and won't turn over. She tries several more times, but the car won't start and the two look at each other in growing panic. Walter desperately reaches over, turns the key and guns the motor, finally starting the car. Only then do they speed away from the crime scene. The result was one of the most suspenseful scenes in the film, but was not in the original script.[40] MacMurray was surprised when he first saw it onscreen: "...When I... turned the key I remember I was doing it fast and Billy kept saying, 'Make it longer, make it longer,' and finally I yelled, 'For Chrissake Billy, it's not going to hold that long,' and he said, 'Make it longer,' and he was right."[41]Wilder managed to bring the whole production in under budget at $927,262 despite $370,000 in salaries for just four people ($100,000 each for MacMurray, Stanwyck, and Robinson, and $70,000  $44,000 for writing and $26,000 for directing  for himself).[42]The score to Double Indemnity was composed by Mikls Rzsa, whose work on Wilder's previous film, Five Graves to Cairo, had been his first real Hollywood engagement for a major studio. Wilder had praised that work and promised to use Rzsa on his next film. Wilder had the idea of using a restless string figure (like the opening to Franz Schubert's Unfinished Symphony) to reflect the conspiratorial activities of Walter and Phyllis against her husband which Rzsa felt was a good one (and the Symphony is actually used with a very melodramatic effect in the scene with Lola and Walter in the hill above Hollywood Bowl, 1:23-1:26). As work progressed, Wilder's enthusiasm about Rzsa's score only grew, but the studio's Musical Director, Louis Lipstone, was of a different mind; he and Wilder had previously clashed over some post-production cuts he had made to the Five Graves score which created problems with the music's continuity and logic. Now the two were coming to loggerheads again.[43][44]When it came time to record the score for Double Indemnity, Lipstone made no secret that he despised what Rzsa had done, to which Wilder finally turned to him and snapped, "You may be surprised to hear that I love it. Okay?" Lipstone then disappeared and was not seen at the sessions again. He later summoned Rzsa to his office and reprimanded him for writing "Carnegie Hall music" which had no place in a film. Rzsa took this as a compliment, but Lipstone assured him it was not  and suggested he listen to the music from Madame Curie to learn how to write a proper film score. When Rzsa pointed out that Double Indemnity was a love story, Lipstone suggested his music was more appropriate to The Battle of Russia.[43][45] Lipstone was convinced that as soon as the studio's Artistic Director, Buddy DeSylva, heard the music he would throw it out. At a screening soon after, DeSylva called him over: expecting heads to roll, Lipstone eagerly huddled with his chief  only to have DeSylva praise the music, saying it was exactly the dissonant, hard-hitting score the film needed. The boss's only criticism: there was not enough of it. By this time Lipstone had an arm around DeSylva, asking unctuously, "I always find you the right guy for the job, Buddy, don't I?"[46]The score would go on to be nominated for an Academy Award, and the success brought Rzsa offers to do as many films as he had time for.[46]Exteriors of the Dietrichson house in the film were shot at a 3,200-square-foot (300m2), Spanish Colonial Revival house built in 1927. The house can still be seen today and is located at 6301 Quebec Drive[39] in the Beachwood Canyon neighborhood of Los Angeles. The production team copied the interior of the house, including the spiral staircase, almost exactly on a soundstage at Paramount.[47]The exterior of the train station in the film was the Mission Revival Style Southern Pacific Railroad Depot in Glendale, California built in 1923. The station can now be seen as part of the Glendale Transportation Center and was added to the National Register of Historic Places on May 2, 1997.[48]Other locations around Los Angeles used in the film were an apartment building at 1825 N. Kingsley Drive in Hollywood where Walter Neff lived and the building on the southwest corner of Hollywood Blvd. and Western. That building still stands, but the Newman Drug Store originally on the ground floor is no longer there.[49]Double Indemnity opened on September 6, 1944 and was an immediate hit with audiences  despite a campaign by singer Kate Smith imploring the public to stay away on moral grounds.[50] As James M. Cain recalled, there was a little trouble caused by this fat girl, Kate Smith, who carried on a propaganda asking people to stay away from the picture. Her advertisement probably put a million dollars on its gross.[51]Reviews from the critics were largely positive, though the content of the story made some uncomfortable. While some reviewers found the story implausible and disturbing, others praised it as an original thriller. In his mixed review of the film in The New York Times, film critic Bosley Crowther called the picture "...Steadily diverting, despite its monotonous pace and length." He complained that the two lead characters "...lack the attractiveness to render their fate of emotional consequence," but also felt the movie possessed a "...realism reminiscent of the bite of past French films."[52]Howard Barnes at the New York Herald Tribune was much more enthusiastic, calling Double Indemnity "...one of the most vital and arresting films of the year," and praising Wilder's "...magnificent direction and a whale of a script." The trade paper Variety, meanwhile, said the film "...sets a new standard for screen treatment in its category."[52]Influential radio host and Hearst paper columnist Louella Parsons would go even further, saying, "Double Indemnity is the finest picture of its kind ever made, and I make that flat statement without any fear of getting indigestion later from eating my words."[53]Philip K. Scheur, the Los Angeles Times movie critic, ranked it with The Human Comedy, The Maltese Falcon, and Citizen Kane as Hollywood trailblazers, while Alfred Hitchcock himself wrote Wilder that "Since Double Indemnity, the two most important words in motion pictures are 'Billy' and 'Wilder'".[53]The film's critical reputation has only grown over the years. In 1977, notably terse critic-historian Leslie Halliwell gave it an unusual 4-star (top) rating, and wrote: "Brilliantly filmed and incisively written, perfectly capturing the decayed Los Angeles atmosphere of a Chandler novel, but using a simpler story and more substantial characters."[54] In his 1998 review, film critic Roger Ebert praised director Wilder and cinematographer Seitz. He wrote, "The photography by John F. Seitz helped develop the noir style of sharp-edged shadows and shots, strange angles and lonely Edward Hopper settings."[55]At the 17th Academy Awards on March 15, 1945, Double Indemnity was nominated for seven Oscars, but did not win any.[56]Wilder went to the awards ceremony expecting to win even though the studio had been backing their other big hit of the year, Leo McCarey's Going My Way and studio employees were expected to vote for the studio favorite. As the awards show wore on and Double Indemnity lost in category after category, it became evident that it was going to be a Going My Way sweep. McCarey beamed as his picture won award after award and when he was named Best Director, Wilder could no longer take it. When McCarey got up to make his way to the stage to accept the award for best picture, Wilder, sitting on the aisle, stuck out his foot and tripped him. "Mr. McCarey...stumbled perceptibly," he gleefully recalled.[57] After the ceremony while he and his wife Judith were waiting for his limousine to arrive, he yelled out so loudly that everybody could hear him, "What the hell does the Academy Award mean, for God's sake? After all  Luise Rainer won it two times. Luise Rainer!"[58]American Film Institute recognitionDouble Indemnity was adapted as a radio play on two broadcasts of The Screen Guild Theater, first on March 5, 1945 with Fred MacMurray and Barbara Stanwyck, then five years later on February 16, 1950 with Stanwyck and Robert Taylor.[59] It was also adapted to the October 15, 1948 broadcast of the Ford Theatre with Burt Lancaster and Joan Bennett[60] and the October 30, 1950 broadcast of Lux Radio Theater with MacMurray and Stanwyck.[61]Other films inspired by the Snyder-Gray murder include The Postman Always Rings Twice (also based on a Cain novel) and Body Heat (1981). Both Postman and Double Indemnity were remade: Double Indemnity was a telemovie in 1973 starring Richard Crenna (who also starred in Body Heat), Lee J. Cobb, and Samantha Eggar;[62] it is included on a bonus disc in the American DVD release of the original film. The Postman Rings remake was a 1981 theatrical release. An Indian film, Jism (2003), was also inspired by the film.Double Indemnity is one of the films parodied in the 1993 film Fatal Instinct; the hero's wife conspires to have him shot on a moving train and fall into a lake so that she can collect on his insurance, which has a "triple indemnity" rider. Carol Burnett parodied the film as "Double Calamity" on her TV show.After the success of Double Indemnity, imitators of the film's plot and style were rampant. In 1945, Producers Releasing Corporation, one of the B movie studios of Hollywoods Poverty Row, was set to release a blatant rip-off titled Single Indemnity starring Ann Savage and Hugh Beaumont. Paramount quickly slapped an injunction on the cut-rate potboiler that remains in force to this day. PRC eventually edited its film down to 67 minutes, re-titled it Apology for Murder, and sold it to television in the early '50s as part of a syndicated half-hour mystery show.[63]So many imitations flooded the market, in fact, that James M. Cain believed he deserved credit and remuneration. Unfortunately for Cain, he could not copyright the market on murder. Instead he led a movement within the Screen Writers Guild to create the American Author's Authority, a union that would own its members' works, negotiate better subsidiary deals, and protect against copyright infringement on behalf of its members. This was, however, the depth of the Red Scare in Hollywood and Guild members rejected the socialist notion and ran from the attempt.[64]It was not uncommon at the time for studios to take out ads in trade journals promoting the virtues of their own films. David O. Selznick, no stranger to self-aggrandizement, frequently sought to put a high-culture patina on his pictures with "trade-book" ads. At just the time Double Indemnity was released, Selznick's latest tearjerker, Since You Went Away, was enjoying some box office success. In his ads, Selznick quoted various dignitaries claiming it was the finest picture they had ever seen, how it served such a noble purpose, how it elevated humanity to new levels  no high-toned platitude was too lofty to invoke. Indeed, the ad averred, the words Since You Went Away had become "the four most important words uttered in motion picture history since Gone with the Wind."[65] The petulant Wilder despised such ostentation, so he placed an ad of his own: Double Indemnity, it claimed, were the two most important words uttered in motion picture history since Broken Blossoms, thus comparing D. W. Griffith's artistic 1919 classic with his own sordid story of iniquitous murder. Selznick was not amused and threatened to stop advertising in any of the trades if they continued to run Wilder's ads.[50]Wilder himself considered Double Indemnity his best film in terms of having the fewest scripting and shooting mistakes[66] and always maintained that the two things he was proudest of in his career were the compliments he received from Cain about Double Indemnity and from Agatha Christie for his handling of her Witness for the Prosecution.[53]Wilder was not only proud of his film, he was plainly fond of it as well: "I never heard that expression, film noir, when I made Double Indemnity... I just made pictures I would have liked to see. When I was lucky, it coincided with the taste of the audience. With Double Indemnity, I was lucky."[67]Streaming audioSeptember 6, 1944(1944-09-06)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Background
3.2 Writing
3.3 Casting
3.4 Filming
3.5 Music
3.6 Locations

3.1 Background3.2 Writing3.3 Casting3.4 Filming3.5 Music3.6 Locations4 On screens: 1944 and since

4.1 Critical reception
4.2 Academy Award nominations
4.3 Others awards
4.4 Adaptations
4.5 Imitators, rivals, reflections

4.1 Critical reception4.2 Academy Award nominations4.3 Others awards4.4 Adaptations4.5 Imitators, rivals, reflections5 References6 External links3.1 Background3.2 Writing3.3 Casting3.4 Filming3.5 Music3.6 Locations4.1 Critical reception4.2 Academy Award nominations4.3 Others awards4.4 Adaptations4.5 Imitators, rivals, reflectionsFred MacMurray as Walter NeffBarbara Stanwyck as Phyllis DietrichsonEdward G. Robinson as Barton KeyesPorter Hall as Mr JacksonJean Heather as Lola DietrichsonTom Powers as Mr DietrichsonByron Barr as Nino ZachettiRichard Gaines as Edward S. Norton, Jr.Fortunio Bonanova as Sam GarlopisJohn Philliber as Joe PetersRaymond Chandler as man reading book (cameo)1998 AFI's 100 Years100 Movies #382001 AFI's 100 Years100 Thrills #242002 AFI's 100 Years100 Passions #842003 AFI's 100 Years100 Heroes and Villains:

Phyllis Dietrichson, villain #8

Phyllis Dietrichson, villain #82007 AFI's 100 Years100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #29Phyllis Dietrichson, villain #8Double Indemnity at the Internet Movie DatabaseDouble Indemnity at AllRoviDouble Indemnity at the TCM Movie DatabaseDouble Indemnity film script at the Internet Movie Script DatabaseDouble Indemnity literatureDouble Indemnity: The Complete File story analysisDouble Indemnity on Screen Guild Theater: March 5, 1945Double Indemnity on Lux Radio Theater: October 30, 1950Doctor Zhivago ( ) is a 1965 epic dramaromance film directed by David Lean, starring Omar Sharif and Julie Christie. The film is loosely based on the famous novel of the same name by Boris Pasternak. It has remained popular for decades, and as of 2012 is the eighth highest grossing film of all time in the United States, adjusted for inflation.[1]The film takes place mostly against a backdrop of World War I, the Russian Revolution and Russian Civil War. A narrative framing device, set in the late 1940s to early 1950s, involves KGB Lieutenant General Yevgraf Andreyevich Zhivago (Alec Guinness) searching for the daughter of his half brother, doctor Yuri Andreyevich Zhivago (Omar Sharif), and Larissa ("Lara") Antipova (Julie Christie). Yevgraf believes a young woman, Tonya Komarovskaya (Rita Tushingham) may be his niece, and tells her the story of her father's life.When Yuri Zhivago is orphaned after his mother's death, he is taken in by his mother's friends, Alexander 'Sasha' (Ralph Richardson) and Anna (Siobhn McKenna) Gromeko  and grows up with their daughter Tonya. Years later, Zhivago, a medical student by training, and a poet in heart, meets Tonya (Geraldine Chaplin) again when she returns as a young lady from Paris to Moscow.Lara, meanwhile, engaged to the idealistic Pavel Pavlovich ("Pasha") Antipov (Tom Courtenay), is seduced by Victor Ipolitovich Komarovsky (Rod Steiger), a friend of her mother's (Adrienne Corri). Pasha drifts into left-wing extremism after being wounded by sabre-wielding Dragoons during a peaceful protest. Pasha goes to Lara to treat his wound and asks her to hide a gun he picked up at the demonstration.Lara's mother discovers her affair with Komarovsky and attempts suicide. Komarovsky summons help and Zhivago arrives as the physician's assistant. When Komarovsky learns of Lara's intentions to marry Pasha, he tries to dissuade Lara, and then rapes her. In revenge, Lara takes the pistol she has been hiding for Pasha and shoots Komarovsky at a Christmas Eve party, wounding him. Komarovsky insists that no action be taken against Lara, who is escorted out by Pasha. Yuri attends to Komarovsky's wound. Although enraged and devastated by Lara's infidelity, Pasha still marries Lara, and they have a daughter, Katya.During World War I, Yevgraf Zhivago is sent by Russian Social Democratic Labour Party to subvert the Imperial Russian Army for the Bolsheviks. Pasha is missing in action following a daring charge attack on German forces. Lara enlists as a nurse in order to search for him. Yuri becomes a battlefield doctor. When the February Revolution breaks, Zhivago enlists Lara's help to tend to the wounded, and together they run a field hospital in a dacha for six months, during which time radical changes ensue throughout Russia, as the October Revolution breaks out and Vladimir Lenin arrives in Moscow.After the war, Yuri returns to his wife Tonya, son Sasha, and father-in-law, whose house in Moscow has been divided into tenements by the new Soviet government. His half-brother Yevgraf, who is now working for the CHEKA, finds him, and informs him that his poems have been condemned by Soviet censors as antagonistic to Communism. Yevgraf helps arrange for rail passes for Yuri and his family to escape to the Gromeko estate at Varykino, in the Ural Mountains.Zhivago, Tonya, Sasha and Alexander board a heavily-guarded cattle train, during which time they are informed that they'll be traveling in the midst of contested territory being secured by a Bolshevik commander named Strelnikov. On the way, while the train is stopped, Zhivago wanders away from the train, and stumbles across the armored train of Strelnikov himself, sitting on a hidden siding. Yuri recognizes Strelnikov as Pasha Antipov. After a tense interview, Strelnikov informs Yuri that Lara is living with her daughter Katya in the town of Yuriatin  which is then occupied by the anti-Communist White Army. He allows Zhivago to return to his family, although it is hinted by a guard that most people interrogated by Strelnikov end up being shot.The family lives a peaceful life at Varykino, until Zhivago finds Lara in the nearby Yuriatin. They surrender to their long repressed feelings, beginning an extra-marital affair. When Tonya is pregnant, Zhivago breaks off with Lara, only to be abducted and conscripted into service by Communist partisans. After two years, Zhivago deserts, trudging through the snow to Yuriatin. Lara reveals a letter from Tonya, in which she tells Yuri that she, her father, and Sasha have emigrated to Paris, and had met with Lara while searching for the long-lost Yuri. She writes, partly, "I must honestly admit that {Lara} Antipova is a good person." Zhivago decides to stay with Lara.Komarovsky arrives one night and informs them that they are being watched by the CHEKA, due to Lara's marriage to Commissar Strelnikov (who has at this point fallen out of favor with the Soviets) and Yuri's "counter-revolutionary" poetry and desertion. Komarovsky offers Yuri and Lara his help in leaving Russia, but they refuse. Instead, they go to the desolate Varykino estate. Yuri begins writing the "Lara" poems, which will later make him famous but incur governmental displeasure. Komarovsky reappears and tells Yuri that Strelnikov committed suicide while being taken to his execution. Therefore, Lara is in immediate danger, as the CHEKA had apparently only left her free to lure Strelnikov into the open. Zhivago agrees to send Lara away with Komarovsky, who has become an official in the Far East. Refusing to leave with a man he despises, Yuri remains behind.Years later, during the Stalinist era, Yuri sees Lara while traveling on a tram. Forcing his way off the tram, he runs after her, at which point he suffers a fatal heart attack. Yuri's funeral is well attended, as his poetry is already being published openly due to shifts in politics. Lara informs Yevgraf that she has given birth to Yuri's daughter, but lost her in the collapse of the White-controlled government in Mongolia. After vainly looking over hundreds of orphans with Yevgraf's help, Lara disappears during Joseph Stalin's Great Purge, and "died or vanished somewhere, in one of the labour camps", according to Yevgraf.While Yevgraf strongly believes that Tanya Komarovskaya is Yuri's and Lara's daughter, she is still not convinced. Yevgraf notices that Tanya carries with her a balalaika. He recalls that Yuri's mother left him one after her death. Finding that Tanya learned to play the balalaika by herself, he smiles, "Ah, then, it's a gift," thereby implying that she truly must be their daughter after all.This famous film version by David Lean was created for various reasons. Pasternak's novel had been an international success, and producer Carlo Ponti was interested in adapting it as a vehicle for his wife, Sophia Loren. Lean, coming off the huge success of Lawrence of Arabia (1962), wanted to make a more intimate, romantic film to balance the action- and adventure-oriented tone of his previous film. One of the first actors signed onboard was Omar Sharif, who had played Lawrence's right-hand man Sherif Ali in Lawrence of Arabia. Sharif loved the novel, and when he heard Lean was making a film adaptation, he requested to be cast in the role of Pasha (which ultimately went to Tom Courtenay). Sharif was quite surprised when Lean suggested that he play Zhivago himself. Peter O'Toole, star of Lawrence of Arabia, was Lean's original choice for Zhivago, but turned the part down; Max von Sydow and Paul Newman were also considered. Michael Caine tells in his autobiography that he also read for Zhivago, but (after watching the results with David Lean) was the one who suggested Omar Sharif.[2] Rod Steiger was cast as Komarovsky after Marlon Brando and James Mason turned the part down. Audrey Hepburn was considered for Tonya, while Robert Bolt lobbied for Albert Finney to play Pasha. Lean, however, was able to convince Ponti that Loren was not right for the role of Lara, saying she was "too tall" (and confiding in screenwriter Robert Bolt that he could not accept Loren as a virgin for the early parts of the film), and Yvette Mimieux, Sarah Miles and Jane Fonda were considered for the role. Ultimately, Julie Christie was cast based on her appearance in Billy Liar (1963), and the recommendation of John Ford, who directed her in Young Cassidy.Since the book was banned in the Soviet Union, the movie was filmed largely in Spain over ten months,[3] with the entire Moscow set being built from scratch outside of Madrid. Most of the scenes covering Zhivago and Lara's service in World War I were filmed in Soria, as was the Varykino estate. Some of the winter sequences were filmed in Spain, Finland, mostly landscape scenes, and Yuri's escape from the Partisans. Winter scenes of the family travelling to Yuriatin by rail were filmed in Canada. All the trains used in the film were Spanish trains like RENFE 240 ex 1400 MZA and Strelnikov's armoured train towed by the Renfe 2-8-2 class Mikado. The "ice-palace" at Varykino was filmed in Soria as well, a house filled with frozen beeswax. The charge of the Partisans across the frozen lake was filmed in Spain, too; a cast iron sheet was placed over a dried river-bed, and fake snow (mostly marble dust) was added on top. Some of the winter scenes were filmed in summer with warm temperatures, sometimes of up to 25C (86F).Other locations include the Estacin de Madrid-Delicias in Madrid and El Moncayo.The film was entered into the 1966 Cannes Film Festival.[4]Despite being a spectacular box office hit, Doctor Zhivago actually received mixed reviews at the time of its release. It was criticised for its length and depiction of the romance between Zhivago and Lara. Lean made Ryan's Daughter in 1970, filmed a made-for-TV short a few years later, then waited until 1984 to make his final film, A Passage to India .[5]The film left an indelible mark on popular culture and fashion, and to this day remains an extremely popular film: Maurice Jarre's scoreparticularly "Lara's Theme"became one of the most famous in cinematic history. Over the years, the film's critical reputation has gained in stature, and today Doctor Zhivago is considered to be one of Lean's finest works and is highly critically acclaimed, along with Lawrence of Arabia, Brief Encounter, The Bridge on the River Kwai, and A Passage to India.As with the novel itself, the film was banned in the Soviet Union. It was not shown in Russia until 1994.Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an 85% 'Fresh' rating.[6]The film won five Academy Awards and was nominated for five more:[10][11]On May 4, 2002, Warner Bros. released the 45th Anniversary version of Doctor Zhivago on DVD (two disc set) and on Blu-ray (a three-disc set that includes a book).[12] The two-disc set consists of a double-sided DVD for the main film (whereas the DVD has to be flipped for part 2 of the film), and a one-sided DVD for the extras.December 22, 1965(1965-12-22) (US)April 26, 1966(1966-04-26) (UK)December 10, 1966(1966-12-10) (Italy)September 28, 1999(1999-09-28) (US re-release)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception

4.1 American Film Institute recognition

4.1 American Film Institute recognition5 Awards6 Home video7 See also8 References9 External links4.1 American Film Institute recognitionOmar Sharif as Dr. Yuri Andreyevich ZhivagoJulie Christie as Lara AntipovaGeraldine Chaplin as Tonya GromekoRod Steiger as Victor KomarovskyAlec Guinness as General Yevgraf ZhivagoTom Courtenay as Pasha Antipov/"Strelnikov"Siobhn McKenna as Anna GromekoRalph Richardson as Alexander "Sasha" GromekoRita Tushingham as Tanya Komarovskaya/"The Girl"Klaus Kinski as Kostoyed AmourskyGerard Tichy as LiberiusNoel Willman as Commissar RazinGeoffrey Keen as Professor Boris KurtBernard Kay as Kuril, the BolshevikJack MacGowran as Petya, the GroundskeeperGwen Nelson as the female janitorAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #39AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions - #7AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - Nominated[7]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - Nominated[8]AFI's 10 Top 10 - Nominated Epic Film[9]Best Art Direction (John Box, Terence Marsh, Dario Simoni)Best Cinematography (Freddie Young)Best Adapted Screenplay (Robert Bolt)Best Costume DesignBest Original ScoreBest PictureBest Supporting Actor (Tom Courtenay)Best Director (David Lean)Best EditingBest Sound (A. W. Watkins, Franklin Milton)BFI Top 100 British filmsDoctor Zhivago at the Internet Movie DatabaseDoctor Zhivago at the TCM Movie DatabaseDoctor Zhivago at AllRoviDoctor Zhivago at Rotten TomatoesDoctor Zhivago at the British Film Institute's ScreenonlineNorth by Northwest is a 1959 American thriller film directed by Alfred Hitchcock, starring Cary Grant, Eva Marie Saint and James Mason. The screenplay was written by Ernest Lehman, who wanted to write "the Hitchcock picture to end all Hitchcock pictures".[1]North by Northwest is a tale of mistaken identity, with an innocent man pursued across the United States by agents of a mysterious organization who want to stop his interference in their plans to smuggle out microfilm containing government secrets.Author and journalist Nick Clooney praised Lehman's original story and sophisticated dialogue, calling the film "certainly Alfred Hitchcock's most stylish thriller, if not his best".[2]This is one of several Hitchcock movies with a music score by Bernard Herrmann and features a memorable opening title sequence by graphic designer Saul Bass. This film is generally cited as the first to feature extended use of kinetic typography in its opening credits.[3]For a discussion of the title, see below.Roger O. Thornhill, a twice-divorced Madison Avenue advertising executive (Cary Grant), is mistaken for "George Kaplan", and is kidnapped by Valerian (Adam Williams) and Licht (Robert Ellenstein). The two take him to the house of Lester Townsend on Long Island. There he is interrogated by a man he assumes to be Townsend, but who is actually foreign spy Phillip Vandamm (James Mason). He orders his right-hand man Leonard (Martin Landau) to get rid of him.Thornhill is forced to drink bourbon in an attempt to stage a fatal road accident. However, he pushes one thug out of the car and drives off. After a perilous drive, he is arrested for drunk driving. He is unable to get the police, the judge, or even his mother (Jessie Royce Landis) to believe what happened to him, especially when a woman at Townsend's residence says he got drunk at her dinner party; she also remarks that Lester Townsend is a United Nations diplomat.Thornhill and his mother go to Kaplan's hotel room. While in the room, Thornhill answers the phone; it is one of Vandamm's henchmen. Narrowly avoiding recapture, Thornhill takes a taxi to the General Assembly building of the United Nations, where Townsend is due to deliver a speech. Thornhill meets Townsend face to face and is surprised to find that the diplomat is not the man who interrogated him. Townsend also expresses surprise that people he doesn't know were in his house. Before they can talk any more, Valerian throws a knife, striking Townsend in the back. He falls forward, dead, into Thornhill's arms. Without thinking, Thornhill removes the knife, making it appear to onlookers that he is the killer. He flees.Knowing that Kaplan has a reservation at a Chicago hotel the next day, Thornhill sneaks onto the 20th Century Limited. On board, he meets Eve Kendall (Eva Marie Saint), who hides Thornhill from policemen searching the train. She asks about his personalized matchbooks with the initials ROT; he says the O stands for nothing. Unbeknownst to Thornhill, Eve is working with Vandamm and Leonard, who are in another compartment. Upon arriving in Chicago, Thornhill borrows a porter's uniform and carries Eve's luggage through the crowd, eluding police. Eve lies to Thornhill, telling him she has arranged a meeting with Kaplan.Thornhill travels by bus to an isolated crossroads, with flat countryside all around and only scarce traffic in northwest Indiana an hour and half drive south of Chicago. Another man (Malcolm Atterbury) is dropped off at the bus stop, but he turns out to be unconnected to Thornhill. Moments later, the plane turns toward Thornhill. To his terror, it dives at him, passing him at an altitude of only a few feet, forcing him to throw himself to the ground. Thornhill flees to the cover of a cornfield, but the plane dusts it with pesticide, forcing him out. Desperate, Thornhill steps in front of a speeding gasoline tank truck, making it stop. The plane crashes into the tank truck and explodes.Thornhill returns to the hotel, where he is surprised to learn that Kaplan had already checked out when Eve claimed to have spoken to him. Suspicious, he goes to Eve's room to question her. She lets him get cleaned up as she leaves. From the impression of a message written on a notepad, Thornhill learns her destination: an art auction. There, he finds Vandamm, Leonard, and Eve. Vandamm purchases a pre-Columbian Tarascan statue and departs. Thornhill tries to follow, only to find all exits covered by Vandamm's men. He escapes from them by placing nonsensical bids, making such a nuisance of himself that the police have to be called to remove him.Thornhill tries to remain safely in police custody and identifies himself as the fugitive wanted for Townsend's murder, but the officers are ordered to take him to Midway Airport instead of a police station. He meets the Professor (Leo G. Carroll), an international British spymaster who is after Vandamm. The Professor reveals that George Kaplan does not exist: he was invented to distract Vandamm from the real government agent  Eve, who was already in a relationship with Vandamm when alerted by the Professor to Vandamm's espionage activity. As Eve's life is now in danger, Thornhill agrees to help the Professor in order to protect her.They fly to Rapid City, South Dakota, where Thornhill (now pretending to be Kaplan) meets Eve and Vandamm in a crowded cafeteria at the base of Mount Rushmore. He offers to let Vandamm leave the country in exchange for Eve, but is turned down. When he tries to keep her from leaving, Eve shoots Thornhill and flees. He is taken away in an ambulance. At a secluded spot, however, he emerges unharmed, having been shot with blanks. To his dismay, he learns that, having proven her loyalty and made herself a fugitive, Eve will accompany Vandamm out of the country that night. To keep him from interfering further, Thornhill is locked in a hospital room.Thornhill manages to escape and goes to Vandamm's mountainside home, slipping inside undetected. He learns that the Tarascan statue contains secrets on microfilm. While Eve is out of the room, Leonard fires the gun she used at Vandamm, demonstrating how the shooting was faked. Vandamm decides to throw Eve out of the airplane when they are flying over water. Thornhill manages to warn her by writing a note inside one of his ROT matchbooks and dropping it where she can find it.On the way to the airplane, Eve grabs the statue and joins Thornhill. Leonard and Valerian chase them across the top of the Mount Rushmore monument. Valerian lunges at the pair, but falls to his death. Eve slips and clings desperately to the steep mountainside. Thornhill grabs her hand, while precariously holding on with his other hand. Leonard appears and treads on his hand. They are saved when the Professor has a police marksman shoot Leonard, whose lifeless body falls off the mountain, and Vandamm is arrested.The scene transitions from Thornhill pulling Eve up to safety on Mount Rushmore to him pulling her, now his wife, onto an upper bunk on a train. The final shot shows their train euphemistically speeding into a tunnel.Hitchcock's cameo appearances are a signature occurrence in most of his films. In North by Northwest he can be seen missing a bus at the end of the opening credits.[citation needed]MGM wanted Cyd Charisse for the role played by Eva Marie Saint. Hitchcock stood by his choice.[4]John Russell Taylor's official biography of Hitchcock, Hitch: The Life and Times of Alfred Hitchcock (1978), suggests that the story originated after a spell of writer's block during the scripting of another movie project:Alfred Hitchcock had agreed to do a film for MGM, and they had chosen an adaptation of the novel The Wreck of the Mary Deare by Hammond Innes. Composer Bernard Herrmann had recommended that Hitchcock work with his friend Ernest Lehman. After a couple of weeks, Lehman offered to quit saying he didn't know what to do with the story. Hitchcock told him they got along great together and they would just write something else. Lehman said that he wanted to make the ultimate Hitchcock film. Hitchcock thought for a moment then said he had always wanted to do a chase across Mount Rushmore.Lehman and Hitchcock spitballed more ideas: a murder at the United Nations Headquarters; a murder at a car plant in Detroit; a final showdown in Alaska. Eventually they settled on the U.N. murder for the opening and the chase across Mount Rushmore for the climax.For the central idea, Hitchcock remembered something an American journalist had told him about spies creating a fake agent as a decoy. Perhaps their hero could be mistaken for this fictitious agent and end up on the run. They bought the idea from the journalist for $10,000.Lehman would sometimes repeat this story himself, as in the documentary Destination Hitchcock that accompanied the 2001 DVD release of the film. In his 2000 book Which Lie Did I Tell?, screenwriter William Goldman, commenting on the film, insists that it was Lehman who created North by Northwest and that many of Hitchcock's ideas were not used. Hitchcock had the idea of the hero being stranded in the middle of nowhere, but suggested the villains try to kill him with a tornado.[5] Lehman responded, "but they're trying to kill him. How are they going to work up a cyclone?" Then, as he told an interviewer; "I just can't tell you who said what to whom, but somewhere during that afternoon, the cyclone in the sky became the crop-duster plane."[5]In fact, Hitchcock had been working on the story for nearly nine years prior to meeting Lehman. The "American journalist" who had the idea that influenced the director was Otis C. Guernsey, a respected reporter who was inspired by a true story during World War II when a couple of British secretaries created a fictitious agent and watched as the Germans wasted time following him around. Guernsey turned his idea into a story about an American traveling salesman who travels to the Middle East and is mistaken for a fictitious agent, becoming "saddled with a romantic and dangerous identity." Guernsey admitted that his treatment was full of "corn" and "lacking logic." He urged Hitchcock to do what he liked with the story. Hitchcock bought the sixty pages for $10,000.Hitchcock often told journalists of an idea he had about Cary Grant hiding out from the villains inside Abraham Lincoln's nose and being given away when he sneezes. He speculated that the film could be called "The Man in Lincoln's Nose" (Lehman's version is that it was "The Man on Lincoln's Nose"[6]) or even "The Man who Sneezed in Lincoln's Nose," though he probably felt the latter was insulting to his adopted America. Hitchcock sat on the idea, waiting for the right screenwriter to develop it. At one stage "The Man in Lincoln's Nose" was touted as a collaboration with John Michael Hayes. When Lehman came on board, the traveling salesman  which had previously been suited to James Stewart  was adapted to a Madison Avenue advertising executive, a position which Lehman had formerly held. In an interview in the book Screenwriters on Screenwriting (1995), Lehman stated that he had already written much of the screenplay before coming up with critical elements of the climax.[citation needed]The filming of North by Northwest took place between August and December 1958 with the exception of a few re-takes that were shot in April 1959.[citation needed]This was the only Hitchcock film released by MGM. It is owned by Turner Entertainment  since 1996 a division of Warner Bros.  which owns the pre-1986 MGM library.At Hitchcock's insistence, the film was made in Paramount's VistaVision widescreen process, making it one of the few VistaVision films made at MGM.[citation needed]The car chase scene in which Thornhill is drunkenly careening along the edge of cliffs high above the ocean, supposedly on Long Island, was actually shot on the California coast, and in Griffith Park in Los Angeles, according to DVD audio commentary. However the Townsend estate is actually a Long Island Gold Coast mansion that is now the Old Westbury Gardens.[citation needed]The cropduster sequence, meant to take place in northern Indiana, was shot on location on Garces Highway (155) near the towns of Wasco and Delano, north of Bakersfield in Kern County, California (354538.81N 1193341.52W / 35.7607806N 119.5615333W / 35.7607806; -119.5615333).[7] Years later, in a show at the Pompidou Center called "Hitchcock and Art: Fatal Coincidences", an aerial shot of Grant in the cornfield, with a "road cutting straight through the cornrows to the edge of the screen", was said to draw on Lon Spilliaert's "Le Paquebot ou L'Estran", which features "alternating strips of sand and ocean blue bands stretch[ed] to the edge of the canvas."[8]The aircraft seen flying in the scene is a Naval Aircraft Factory N3N Canary, a World War II Navy pilot trainer sometimes converted for cropdusting.[9] The aircraft that hits the truck and explodes is a wartime Stearman (Boeing Model 75) trainer. Like its N3N lookalike, many were used for agricultural purposes through the 1970s. The plane was piloted by Bob Coe, a local cropduster from Wasco.[10] Hitchcock placed replicas of square Indiana highway signs in the scene. In an extensive list of "1001 Greatest Movie Moments" of all time, the British movie magazine Empire in its August 2009 issue ranked the cropduster scene as the best.[11]The shootout on Mount Rushmore at the end of the film was filmed on a replica constructed in Hollywood.[citation needed]The house at the end of the film was not real. Hitchcock asked the set designers to make the set resemble a house by Frank Lloyd Wright, the most popular architect in America at the time, using the materials, form and interiors associated with him. The set was built in Culver City, where MGM's studios were located. House exteriors were matte paintings.A panel of fashion experts convened by GQ in 2006 said gray suit worn by Cary Grant throughout almost the entire film was the best suit in film history, and the most influential on men's style, stating that it has since been copied for Tom Cruise's character in Collateral and Ben Affleck's character in Paycheck.[12] This sentiment has been echoed by writer Todd McEwen, who called it "gorgeous," and wrote a short story "Cary Grant's Suit" which recounts the film's plot from the viewpoint of the suit.[13] There is some disagreement as to who tailored the suit; according to Vanity Fair magazine, it was Norton & Sons of London,[14] although according to The Independent it was Quintino of Beverly Hills.[15]Eva Marie Saint's wardrobe for the film was originally entirely chosen by MGM. Hitchcock disliked MGM's selections and the actress and director went to Bergdorf Goodman in New York to select what she would wear.[16]In Franois Truffaut's book-length interview, Hitchcock/Truffaut (1967), Hitchcock said[where?] that MGM wanted North by Northwest cut by 15 minutes so the film's length would run under two hours. Hitchcock had his agent check his contract, learned that he had absolute control over the final cut, and refused.One of Eva Marie Saint's lines in the dining car seduction scene was redubbed. She originally said "I never make love on an empty stomach," but it was changed in post-production to "I never discuss love on an empty stomach." It is said[by whom?] that the censors felt the original version was too risqu.The trailer for North by Northwest features Hitchcock presenting himself as the owner of Alfred Hitchcock Travel Agency and telling the viewer he has made a motion picture to advertise these wonderful vacation stops.[18]The world premiere took place at the San Sebastian International Film Festival.Time magazine called the film "smoothly troweled and thoroughly entertaining."[19] A. H. Weiler of The New York Times made it a "Critic's Pick" and said it was the "year's most scenic, intriguing and merriest chase"; Weiler complimented the two leads: "Cary Grant, a veteran member of the Hitchcock acting varsity, was never more at home than in this role of the advertising-man-on-the-lam. He handles the grimaces, the surprised look, the quick smile, ... and all the derring-do with professional aplomb and grace, In casting Eva Marie Saint as his romantic vis--vis, Mr. Hitchcock has plumbed some talents not shown by the actress heretofore. Although she is seemingly a hard, designing type, she also emerges both the sweet heroine and a glamorous charmer."[20]During its two-week run at Radio City Music Hall, the film grossed $404,056, setting a record in that theater's non-holiday gross.[21]The London edition of Time Out magazine, reviewing the film nearly a half-century after its initial release, commented:Fifty years on, you could say that Hitchcocks sleek, wry, paranoid thriller caught the zeitgeist perfectly: Cold War shadiness, secret agents of power, urbane modernism, the ant-like bustle of city life, and a hint of dread behind the sharp suits of affluence. Cary Grants Roger Thornhill, the films sharply dressed ad exec who is sucked into a vortex of mistaken identity, certainly wouldnt be out of place in Mad Men. But theres nothing dated about this perfect storm of talent, from Hitchcock and Grant to writer Ernest Lehman (Sweet Smell of Success), co-stars James Mason and Eva Marie Saint, composer Bernard Herrmann and even designer Saul Bass, whose opening-credits sequence still manages to send a shiver down the spine.[22]North By Northwest currently holds a 100% approval rating on the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, based on 61 reviews. The site's consensus calls the film "Gripping, suspenseful and visually iconic" and claims it "laid the groundwork for countless action thrillers to follow."[23] The film also ranks at number 98 in Empire magazines list of the 500 Greatest Films of All Time.[24]Hitchcock planned the film as a change of pace after his dark romantic thriller Vertigo a year earlier. In his book-length interview Hitchcock/Truffaut (1967) with Franois Truffaut, Hitchcock said that he wanted to do "something fun, light-hearted, and generally free of the symbolism permeating his other movies."[25] Writer Ernest Lehman has also mocked those who look for symbolism in the film.[26] Despite its popular appeal, the movie is considered to be a masterpiece for its themes of deception, mistaken identity, and moral relativism in the Cold War era.The title North by Northwest is both inherently obvious (given the geographic location of the films climax) and obscure. Many have seen it as having been taken from a line ("I am but mad north-north-west: when the wind is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw.") in Hamlet, a work also concerned with the shifty nature of reality.[27] Hitchcock noted this in an interview with Peter Bogdanovich in 1963. Lehman states that he used a working title for the film of "In a Northwesterly Direction," because the film's action was to begin in New York and climax in Alaska.[6] Then the head of the story department at MGM suggested "North by Northwest," but this was still to be a working title.[6] Other titles were considered, including "The Man on Lincoln's Nose," but "North by Northwest" was kept because, according to Lehman, "We never did find a [better] title."[6] The Northwest Airlines reference in the film plays on the title. The title is not an actual compass direction, the two closest directions being northwest by north (NWbN) and north-northwest (NNW), with the latter traditionally taken as the title's intended meaning.The film's plot involves a "MacGuffin", a term popularized by Hitchcock: a physical object that everyone in the film is chasing but which has no deep relationship to the plot. Late in North by Northwest, it emerges that the spies are attempting to smuggle microfilm containing government secrets out of the country. They have been trying to kill Thornhill, whom they believe to be the agent on their trail, 'George Kaplan'.North by Northwest has been referred to as "the first James Bond film"[28] due to its similarities with splashily colorful settings, secret agents, and an elegant, daring, wisecracking leading man opposite a sinister yet strangely charming villain.The film's final shot  that of the train speeding into a tunnel during a romantic assignation onboard  is a famous bit of self-conscious Freudian symbolism reflecting Hitchcock's mischievous sense of humor. In the book Hitchcock / Truffaut (p.107-108), Hitchcock called it a "phallic symbol... probably one of the most impudent shots I ever made."North by Northwest was released on the Blu-ray Disc format in the United States on November 3, 2009 by Warner Bros. with a 1080p VC-1 encoding.[29][30] This release is a special 50th anniversary edition. A 50th anniversary edition on DVD was also released by Warner Bros.[31]North by Northwest was nominated for three Academy Awards for Film Editing (George Tomasini), Art Direction (William A. Horning, Robert F. Boyle, Merrill Pye, Henry Grace, Frank McKelvy), and Original Screenplay (Ernest Lehman).[32] All three Oscars went instead to Ben-Hur. The film also won, for Lehman, a 1960 Edgar Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay. In 1995, North by Northwest was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."In June 2008, the AFI revealed its "Ten top Ten"  the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genres  after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. North by Northwest was acknowledged as the seventh best film in the mystery genre.[33]American Film Institute recognition[33]The movie title is reported to have been the influence for the name of the popular annual live music festival South By Southwest in Austin, Texas, started in 1987, with the name idea coming from Louis Black, editor and co-founder of the local alternative weekly The Austin Chronicle as a play on the Hitchcock movie title.[34]The Family Guy episode "North By North Quahog" not only parodies the film's title but also recreates a few of the film's iconic scenes including the biplane attack and the chase across Mt Rushmore.[35]The Simpsons episode Treehouse of Horror XX contains several scenes from the film as well as other Hitchcock films in its first segment, Dial 'M' for Murder or Press '#' to Return to Main Menu. Bernard Herrmann's main theme from the soundtrack of North by Northwest is used extensively during that part of the episode.In the NCIS episode "Enemy on the Hill" (Season 9, episode 4), the prime suspect being pursued is named "George Kaplan" and appears to exist only on paper. Towards the end of the episode Tony realizes that their Kaplan may have been inspired by the George Kaplan in Hitchcock's North By Northwest. This ultimately leads to the arrest of the real suspect.In the movie Charley Varrick just prior to a variant of a crop duster chase scene, a romantic scene references directional lovemaking in a round bed, specifically "south by southwest".July 28, 1959(1959-07-28)1 Plot2 Cast3 Origins4 Production

4.1 Filming
4.2 Set design
4.3 Costuming
4.4 Editing and post-production
4.5 Music

4.1 Filming4.2 Set design4.3 Costuming4.4 Editing and post-production4.5 Music5 Release6 Reception7 Themes and motifs 8 Home media9 Awards10 Influences11 References12 External links4.1 Filming4.2 Set design4.3 Costuming4.4 Editing and post-production4.5 MusicCary Grant as Roger ThornhillEva Marie Saint as Eve KendallJames Mason as Phillip VandammMartin Landau as LeonardLeo G. Carroll as The ProfessorJessie Royce Landis as Thornhill's mother ClaraPhilip Ober as Lester TownsendJosephine Hutchinson as Mrs. TownsendAdam Williams as ValerianRobert Ellenstein as LichtPatrick McVey as Sergeant FlammEdward Platt as Victor LarrabeeMalcolm Atterbury as the man at the crossroadsAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  #40AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills  #4AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Phillip Vandamm  Nominated Villain

Phillip Vandamm  Nominated VillainAFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  NominatedAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #55AFI's 10 Top 10  #7 Mystery FilmPhillip Vandamm  Nominated VillainNorth by Northwest at the Internet Movie DatabaseNorth by Northwest at Rotten TomatoesNorth by Northwest at AllRoviNorth by Northwest at the TCM Movie DatabaseNorth by Northwest Screenshot Gallery at hitchcockfans.comPauline Kael (July 14, 1975). "American Masters. Cary Grant". New Yorker magazine. p.3. Archived from the original on 2005-05-25. http://web.archive.org/web/20050525055737/http://www.pbs.org/wnet/americanmasters/database/grant_c.html.Christopher D. Morris. "The Direction of North by Northwest". Cinema Journal, Vol. 36, No. 4 (Summer, 1997): 4356. JSTOR1225612.West Side Story is a 1961 musical film directed by Robert Wise and Jerome Robbins. The film is an adaptation of the 1957 Broadway musical of the same name, which in turn was adapted from William Shakespeare's play Romeo and Juliet. It stars Natalie Wood, Richard Beymer, Russ Tamblyn, Rita Moreno and George Chakiris and it was photographed by Daniel L. Fapp, A.S.C., in Panavision 70.The film's opening sequence was shot on the streets of New York City, mainly in the area where the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts campus of Fordham University now stands. Veteran director Robert Wise was chosen as the director and producer because of his familiarity with urban New York dramas, such as Odds Against Tomorrow. Wise had never directed a musical before and when it was suggested that Jerome Robbins, who had directed the stage version, be brought in to handle all the music and dance sequences in the film, Wise agreed. After about one-third of the movie had been shot, the Mirisch Company, which had become increasingly concerned that the production was over-budget, fired Robbins, who, according to Saul Chaplin in his autobiography, nearly suffered a nervous breakdown during the time he worked on the film. The remaining dance numbers were handled by Robbins' assistants. However, because of his great creative contribution to the film, Wise agreed Robbins be given co-directing credit, even though Wise directed the majority of the film himself. The ending title sequence was created by Saul Bass, who is also credited as "visual consultant" on the film.The film was released on October 18, 1961, through United Artists. It received praise from critics and the public, and became the second highest grossing film of the year in the United States. The film won ten Academy Awards in its eleven nominated categories, including Best Picture, as well as a special award for Robbins. West Side Story holds the distinction of having won more Academy Awards than any other musical film (unless one counts the Honorary Award given to Maurice Chevalier in 1959, the year that Gigi won its nine Oscars). The soundtrack album sold more copies than any soundtrack album before it, and more than the original cast album did.[citation needed]Although the plot summary here is divided into two acts, and the film was originally intended to have two acts, it was finally decided[by whom?] that it would work better without an intermission, in order to increase the tension in the plot.[citation needed]The film opens in the streets of Manhattan in the late summer of 1957. There is a mounting tension set to music ("Prologue") between a white American gang, the Jets, led by Riff Lorton (Russ Tamblyn), and a rival gang of Puerto Rican immigrants, the Sharks, led by Bernardo Nuez (George Chakiris). The Jets harass the Sharks and vice versa, culminating in a free-for-all throughout the streets. Eventually, the Sharks catch the youngest member of the Jets, Baby John (Eliot Feld) on the playground. As they begin to "bloody" him, all the other Jets and Sharks rush in and start brawling. Soon, Lieutenant Schrank (Simon Oakland) and Officer Krupke (William Bramley) arrive and break up the melee. Schrank orders the Sharks off the playground and the Jets "to make nice with them Puerto Ricans" or there'll be a price to pay. Once Schrank and Krupke are gone, the Jets discuss challenging the Sharks to an all out rumble that will decide who gets control of the streets. They decide to deliver the challenge to the Sharks at a dance later that night, because it is neutral territory. Riff also explains to the Jets that they have seen other gangs (the Emeralds and the Hawks) come and go, but the Jet members state that the Sharks are different compared to the other gangs. However, Riff eases the statement, that no matter the odds or the situation the Jets will always pull through.Riff decides that his best friend Tony Wycek (Richard Beymer), a co-founder of the Jets who has left the gang to work at a local candy/drug store, would be the best member to present the challenge to the Sharks because he has always come through for the Jets ("Jet Song"). Riff visits Tony at the store and asks him to come to the dance, but Tony is not interested. He tells Riff that he senses something very important is about to happen to him. After a little cajoling from Riff, Tony changes his mind and agrees to meet him and the Jets at the dance, in case it is there that he will discover that "something" ("Something's Coming").Bernardo, along with his friend, Chino, arrives to take his sister Maria (Natalie Wood) and his girlfriend Anita (Rita Moreno) to the dance. At the dance, which is held at the gym, the Jets, Sharks, and girls are greatly enjoying themselves ("Dance at the Gym"). The host of the dance, social worker Glad Hand (John Astin), tries to get the members of the rival gangs to dance together. Even so, the rival gang members and their girlfriends remain apart. During a mambo, Tony and Maria see each other, become infatuated, going into a trance-like state, and begin to dance, oblivious to the rivalry between their ethnic groups. They eventually kiss, but Bernardo angrily interrupts them. He orders Maria home and tells Tony to stay away from his sister. It's at this point that Riff proposes a "war council" with Bernardo, who agrees to meet at Doc's drug store after the dance. Tony leaves in a happy daze, singing of his newfound love ("Maria").Maria is sent home, and Anita argues with Bernardo that they are in America, not Puerto Rico. At the Sharks' apartment building, Anita and other girls from Puerto Rico engage in a spirited argument with Bernardo in defense of Maria's right to dance with whomever she pleases. They debate the advantages and disadvantages of their country ("America"). Eventually the women and the men disperse as Bernardo and his gang go to the war council.Tony discreetly visits Maria outside the fire escape at her home and they confirm their love ("Tonight"). They arrange to meet the next day at the bridal shop where Maria works. Meanwhile, the Jets gather outside of Doc's store to wait for the Sharks. They are visited by Officer Krupke, who warns them not to cause trouble on his beat. After he leaves, they lampoon him and the various theories of how to deal with juvenile delinquency ("Gee, Officer Krupke!"). Doc (Ned Glass) is about to close the store, but the Jets convince him to stay open. The Sharks finally arrive and the war council begins. In the middle of this, Tony arrives and calls them chickens for having to fight with weapons. He demands that they have a fair one-on-one fist fight instead of an all-out rumble. The gang leaders agree, with Bernardo representing the Sharks and Ice (Tucker Smith) representing the Jets (much to Bernardo's disappointment, as he was hoping to face Tony). They are soon alerted of Lieutenant Schrank's arrival, so the gangs quickly intermix together and feign happiness and fun. Schrank pretends that it is a good thing that they are getting along and remarks he might even get a promotion, but he knows what they are up to. Schrank stamping orders the Puerto Ricans out (while they whistle "My Country, 'Tis of Thee"), then asks the Jets where the rumble is taking place,in the process angering several members with sarcastic and insulting coments including A-Rab's father (and especially Action)who Schrank implies his mother is a prostitute, which angers Action who almost attacks Schrank, but is restrained by the other Jets much to the lieutenant's pleasure. Soon, the Jets disperse and Schrank leaves as well, leaving Tony and Doc alone in the store to clean up. Tony, who is in a good mood, surprises Doc and tells him about his love for Maria. The day comes to an end as a distressed Doc closes the store and Tony leaves.The next day at Madam Lucia's bridal shop, Maria sings to her co-workers about how happy and excited she is ("I Feel Pretty"). After everyone except Maria and Anita leaves, Anita tells Maria about the impending rumble accidentally. Anita tells Maria to go home, but Maria insists that she wants to close the store by herself because she has work to do. Suddenly, Tony arrives to see Maria, leaving Anita in shock. Tony tells Anita of his and Maria's love, and Anita mocks Maria. Although Anita is initially shocked to see that Maria and Tony are having a romance, she shows some tolerance but worries about the consequences if Bernardo were to find out. Anita, who is also Maria's roommate, leaves to prepare for a planned date with Bernardo after the rumble. Maria pleads with Tony to prevent the rumble altogether, even if it is only a fist fight, and Tony promises to do so. Then Tony and Maria, using clothes in the bridal shop, fantasize about their wedding ("One Hand, One Heart"). They use the headless mannequins as their parents, best man (Riff) and Maid of Honor (Anita). They exchange wedding vows and kiss.A musical montage ("Quintet") intertwines the feelings of the Jets and Sharks in anticipation of the rumble, Tony and Maria's anticipation of meeting each other, and Anita preparing for her date with Bernardo. The Jets and Sharks arrive at their agreed location for the rumble, a fenced dead-end under a stretch of New York highway. As the "fair fight" begins between Bernardo and Ice, Tony arrives and tries to stop it, but is met with ridicule and mockery from Bernardo and the Sharks. Unable to stand by and watch his best friend be humiliated, Riff angrily lashes out and punches Bernardo ("The Rumble"). Drawing their knives, Riff and Bernardo fight each other. Riff gets the upper hand attempting to stab Bernardo but Tony stops him. Riff breaks away and runs back into the fight, only to be fatally stabbed by Bernardo. Riff collapses while handing the knife to Tony and Bernardo looks shocked at what he has done. Enraged, Tony kills Bernardo with Riff's knife, resulting in a full-fledged melee. Suddenly, police sirens blare out and the gang members flee, leaving behind the bodies of Riff and Bernardo.Blissfully unaware of what has happened, Maria is waiting for Tony on the roof of her apartment building. One of the Sharks, Chino (Jose DeVega), whom Maria has been promised to, arrives and angrily tells her that Tony killed her brother. Tony arrives, and initially Maria lashes out at him in anger, but Tony explains what happened and asks for her forgiveness before he plans to turn himself in to the police. Maria decides that she still loves Tony and begs him to stay with her. They reaffirm their love ("Somewhere"), kiss, and make love for the first time (offscreen).Meanwhile, the Jets (with Ice now in command and joined by the Jet girls) have reassembled outside a garage. Action demands revenge for Riff's death, but Baby John as well as A-Rab, opposes it. Action yells at Baby John and for being scared, A-Rab protects Baby-John and lashes out against Action, then tensions flare amongst several Jets. When a man in an upper apartment window throws a glass piece that breaks on the ground to scare off the jets as well as with his yelling, Action attempts to throw a rock at the man, however, he is subdued by Ice, who pulls all of the jets into the garage and tells them they will have their revenge on the Sharks, but must do it carefully at ease, or get caught and to pay the consequences for their actions. ("Cool"). When all of the Jets have cooled down, they each quietly file out of the garage and make their way back to Doc's Candy Store when Anybodys (Susan Oakes), a tomboy who is desperate to join the Jets, arrives after infiltrating the Sharks' turf and warns them that Chino is now after Tony with a gun. Ice sends the Jets to various locations to find Tony and warn him. Anybodys' persistence finally pays off as Ice asks her to search in and out of the shadows and commends her for her deed.In Maria's bedroom, she and Tony have just finished making love. Tony puts a small mysterious box on Maria's bedroom with the words "Capullo de Rosa". The couple hear Anita arriving home, and Maria and Tony make quick, whispered arrangements to meet at Doc's drug store and run away together to marry. Anita hears through the door and knows that something is going on. Tony escapes through the bedroom window and flees, but Anita sees him running away. Anita chides Maria for the relationship ("A Boy Like That"). Anita says that a man who kills is bad, but she soon softens as Maria sings back. Maria's heartfelt love ("I Have a Love") wins over Anita, and despite her grief over Bernardo's death, Anita agrees to cooperate with a plan to help Maria and Tony run away and marry, because she is her friend. Anita quickly tells Maria that Chino is searching for Tony with a gun.Lieutenant Schrank arrives and questions Maria about the events leading up to the rumble, but Maria is protective of Tony and lies to cover for him. To deceive the policeman, Maria sends Anita to Doc's drugstore on the pretense that she is fetching medicine for her headache. She asks Anita to say she has been detained, explaining she would have gone herself otherwise. Anita's real purpose is to tell Tony (who is found by Anybodys outside Maria's apartment and takes refuge in the cellar of Doc's drugstore) that Maria is detained from meeting him. But when Anita enters the drugstore and asks for Tony, the Jets mock, harass, and mock rape her until Doc stops them. Infuriated by the attack, Anita gives the Jets a different message for Tony: Maria is dead, shot by Chino for loving Tony. Doc reproaches the Jets, then delivers the message to Tony. In shock and despair, Tony runs to find Chino, shouting "Come and get me, too!", and not knowing that Chino is actually secretly waiting for him.Now on the playground next to Doc's store, Tony suddenly sees Maria and they begin to run toward each other with joy. Suddenly, Chino appears and shoots Tony. As the Jets and Sharks arrive, Maria and a fatally wounded Tony reaffirm their love ("Somewhere"), but Tony dies in her arms. Maria takes the gun from Chino and blames the rival gang members for the deaths of Tony, Bernardo, and Riff with their hate, threatening to kill as many of them as she can, while still leaving one bullet for herself. However, she can't do it and drops the gun before sinking to the ground, crying. Three of the Jets start lifting his body and two Sharks join them to help carry him off. Maria and several Jets and Sharks walk behind them in a funeral procession and Chino is arrested and led away by Schrank and Krupke for killing Tony.Act IAct II"One Hand, One Heart" is sung only once in the film, without the instrumental section and the repeat of the second half of the song, in order to avoid repetition."Somewhere" in the stage show is sung by A Shark girl and Tony, as part of the "Somewhere" Ballet, The Ballet portions were omitted from the film, because it slowed down the pace of the film It is sung by Tony and Maria."A Boy Like That"/"I Have a Love" avoids the repetition in the film version, omitting the duet where Anita repeats two of the stanzas, that she just sang, while Maria continues to resist Anita's complaints, which was slowing the pace of the film. Maria resumes, without the duet with Anita, to the transition to the song "I Have a Love" with the words, "You should Know Better".Larry Kert, who originated the role of Tony on Broadway, was 30 around the time of the production and the producers wanted actors who looked believable as teenagers. Carol Lawrence, who originated the role of Maria on stage, was then 29 and considered too old for Maria. This caused some controversy and dissatisfaction when some prospective audience members learned that she had been passed over in favor of a new actress. Tony Mordente (A-Rab on stage, Action in the film) and George Chakiris (Riff on stage in the London production, Bernardo in the film) were invited to act in the film version, as was Tucker Smith, who joined the Broadway production several months after its 1957 debut. Smith went on to play Ice, a role created specifically for the film. David Winters, who originated Baby John, played A-Rab,[1] Eliot Feld (an ensemble member and understudy for Baby John on Broadway) played Baby John, Carole D'Andrea reprised her role as Velma, Tommy Abott reprised his role as Gee-Tar, Jay Norman (Juano on stage) appeared as Pepe, and William Bramley reprised his role as Officer Krupke.Elvis Presley was originally approached for Tony. However, his manager, Colonel Tom Parker, strongly believed the role to be wrong for Elvis and made him decline in favour of other movie musicals. According to legend, the Colonel didn't want Elvis associated with gang warfare and knife crime, although three years earlier, Elvis' character Danny Fisher stabbed and killed the small-time gangster 'shark' Vic Marrow in the movie King Creole. Elvis had had an off screen romance with Natalie Wood before his army stint in 1958. The history between them may have contributed to the Elvis camp turning the role down, but on the other hand, could have resulted in one of the best screen romances of Elvis' and Wood's careers. When the movie became a hit and earned 10 Oscars, Elvis later regretted having given up the part. He was only one of many young stars that were in consideration for the role of Tony. Several Hollywood men auditioned for the part, including Warren Beatty, Tab Hunter, Anthony Perkins, Russ Tamblyn, Burt Reynolds, Troy Donahue, Bobby Darin, Richard Chamberlain, Dennis Hopper, and Gary Lockwood.Bobby Darin made a strong impression on the producers at his audition and was, at one point, in talks for the role. However, he turned it down due to his concert and recording commitments. Tab Hunter, then 30, and Burt Reynolds, nearly 26, were also considered, due to their Broadway and singing credits, but they were dismissed as being too old. Richard Chamberlain was also thought too old at age 26, and chose to renew his contract for Dr. Kildare that same year.When Elvis declined the role of Tony, and other actors either dropped out or didn't make it, the producers settled on their so-called "final five": Warren Beatty, Anthony Perkins, Russ Tamblyn, Troy Donahue, and Richard Beymer. Although he was 28 before filming began, Perkins' boyish looks and Broadway resume seemed to make him a contender for the role, and he was trying to avoid getting typecast after the success of Psycho. Robert Wise originally chose Beatty for the role, figuring that youth was more important than experience. Ultimately, the former child actor Beymer (the most unlikely of the candidates) won the part of Tony. Having been invited for several callbacks, Tamblyn impressed the producers and was given the role of Riff.The producers had not originally thought of Natalie Wood for the role of Maria. She was filming Splendor in the Grass with Warren Beatty and was romantically involved with him off-screen. When Beatty went to screen test for the role of Tony, Wood read opposite him as Maria as a favor because she had been practicing with him. The producers fell in love with the idea of Wood as Maria but did not cast Beatty.Jill St. John, Audrey Hepburn, Diane Baker, Valerie Harper, Elizabeth Ashley, and Suzanne Pleshette were among the many actresses who lobbied for the role of Maria in the film adaptation. However, Hepburn later withdrew because she became pregnant.Both Wood and Beymer tried to do their own singing for the movie, but their voices were ultimately deemed insufficient and they were dubbed by Marni Nixon and Jimmy Bryant, respectively. Wood's contract stated that she would pre-record all her songs. When Wood struggled with the challenging soprano role her voice was blended with Marni Nixon's. Natalie sang the lower portions and Marni provided the higher vocals, (this is similar to Marni's work dubbing some of the vocals for Marilyn Monroe on the song Diamonds Are a Girl's Best Friend). Wood filmed to the mixed vocal recordings. During production, she was led to believe that these versions would be used (with Wood singing the majority of the vocals), although music supervisors Saul Chaplin and Johnny Green had already decided her singing voice would later be completely dubbed by Nixon. As well as acting and singing the role of Ice, Tucker Smith dubbed the singing voice of Riff in "The Jet Song", instead of Russ Tamblyn. Russ' own voice was used in "Gee, Officer Krupke" and the "Quintet". Rita Moreno was dubbed by Betty Wand in the song "A Boy Like That" because the song was in too low a register for her; she sang her own vocals in "America". Marni Nixon sang some of Moreno's parts in the "Quintet". Moreno had intended to sing this herself but couldn't due to illness; Betty Wand was also ill on the day of final recording, so Nixon stepped in to record Anita's vocal line. So, technically, the song is made a quartet and in the counterpoint section of the song, Marni Nixon is singing both Maria's and Anita's lines.The film has been deemed "culturally significant" by the United States Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry in 1997. The film holds the distinction of being the musical film with the most Academy Award wins (10 wins), including Best Picture (three other films also won 11 Oscars each, but they are not musicals).Wins[2][3]NominationsAmerican Film Institute lists:The film currently holds a 93% Fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes.[4]Leonard Bernstein was displeased with the orchestration of the movie, which was done by Sid Ramin and Irwin Kostal, who had orchestrated the original Broadway production. That show was orchestrated for roughly 30 musicians; for the movie, United Artists allowed them triple that, including six saxophone parts, eight trumpets, five pianos and five xylophones.[5] Bernstein found it "overbearing and lacking in texture and subtlety." [6]For the 50th anniversary of the film's 1961 release, a score closer to the Broadway version was created by Garth Edwin Sunderland of the Leonard Bernstein Office, to be performed live at screenings of the movie with the score removed, but the original vocals maintained. The score's New York City premiere was presented at Lincoln Center's Avery Fisher Hall, built atop the original film locations, which were razed in a late 1950s urban renewal project.[5][7][8] The film's cast appeared and was honored at the 50th Anniversary of West Side Story at the 2011 Ventura Film Festival.The Stan Kenton Orchestra recorded Johnny Richards' West Side Story, an entire album of jazz orchestrations based on the Bernstein scores, in 1961. It was previewed by the producers of the motion picture, who lamented that, had they known of its existence, it would have been used as the musical foundation of the new film. The Kenton version won the 1962 Grammy Award for Best Jazz Recording by a Large Group.The film was restored in 2011: digital cinema, aspect ratio 2.20:1, Panavision 70.[clarification needed This ought to be put into a sentence.]October 18, 1961(1961-10-18)1 Plot

1.1 Act I
1.2 Act II

1.1 Act I1.2 Act II2 Cast

2.1 Jets
2.2 Jet Girls
2.3 Sharks
2.4 Shark Girls

2.1 Jets2.2 Jet Girls2.3 Sharks2.4 Shark Girls3 Musical numbers4 Differences from the stage show5 Production

5.1 Casting

5.1 Casting6 Awards and honors

6.1 Academy Awards
6.2 Others

6.1 Academy Awards6.2 Others7 Score and soundtrack8 Restoration9 References10 External links1.1 Act I1.2 Act II2.1 Jets2.2 Jet Girls2.3 Sharks2.4 Shark Girls5.1 Casting6.1 Academy Awards6.2 OthersNatalie Wood (Marni Nixon, singing) as Maria Nuez, Bernardo's younger sister, Chino's fiance, in love with Tony WyzekRichard Beymer (Jimmy Bryant, singing) as Tony Wyzek, inactive co-founder of the Jets with best friend Riff, works at Doc's drug store who is in love with Maria NuezRuss Tamblyn as Riff Lorton, leader of the Jets, best friend of TonyRita Moreno (Betty Wand singing "A Boy Like That", Marni Nixon singing parts of the Quintet) as Anita del Carmen, Bernardo's girlGeorge Chakiris as Bernardo Nuez, leader of the Sharks, older brother of MariaSimon Oakland as Lieutenant Schrank, neighborhood police LieutenantNed Glass as Doc, drugstore ownerWilliam Bramley as Officer Krupke, neighborhood cop, Schrank's right-hand manJohn Astin as Glad Hand, social workerPenny Santon as Madam Lucia, owner of neighborhood bridal shopTucker Smith as Ice/Diesel, Riff's lieutenant, is called "Ice" because of the color of his eyesTony Mordente as Action, a Jet who is easily provoked and often in an angry stateEliot Feld as Baby John, the youngest, and good member of the Jets,David Winters as A-Rab, Baby John's best friendBert Michaels as Snowboy, the comedic member of the JetsDavid Bean as TigerRobert Banas as JoyboyAnthony 'Scooter' Teague as Big DealHarvey Hohnecker as MouthpieceTommy Abbott as Gee-TarSusan Oakes as Anybodys, a tomboy who keeps pestering Riff to be in the Jets. She is eventually accepted after his death.Gina Trikonis as Graziella, Riff's girl.Carole D'Andrea as Velma, Ice's girlRita Hyde d'Amico as Clarice, Big Deal's girlPat Tribble as Minnie, Baby John's girlFrancesca Bellini as "Cool" dancerElaine Joyce as a dancerJose DeVega as Chino Martin, Bernardo's best friendJay Norman as Pepe, Bernardo's lieutenantGus Trikonis as Indio, Pepe's best friendEddie Verso as JuanoJamie Rogers as LocoLarry Roquemore as RoccoRobert E. Thompsonas as LuisNick Covacevich as ToroRudy Del Campo as Del CampoAndre Tayir as ChileYvonne Othon as Consuela, Pepe's girlSuzie Kaye as Rosalia, Indio's girlJoanne Miya as Francisca, Jauno's girlMaria Henley as Teresita, Loco's girlIn the stage show, it is A-Rab who gets beaten up by the Sharks at the beginning, before the free-for-all breaks out between the two gangs. In the film, it is Baby John who gets chased and beaten up after being caught changing some wall graffiti from "SHARKS" to "SHARKS STINK". It is interesting, that as David Winters played Baby John in the stage show and A-rab in the film he avoided being chased and beaten-up both timesif his roles were reversed he would have been chased and beaten up both in the stage show and in the film.One of the lyrics of the "Jet song" was changed in the movie. Instead of second being "When you're a Jet let them do what they can" in the play It is ".....when you're a Jet if the spit hits the fan."In the stage show, "Jet Song" ends, "...on the whole ever mother-lovin' street." In the film, it ends, "...on the whole buggin' ever-lovin' street."In the stage show, Tony and Riff's friendship combination is "Womb to tomb. Sperm to worm." In the film, it is "Womb to tomb. Birth to earth."The order of "Tonight" (Duet) and "America" is reversed.In the stage show, Anita and Rosalia sing the beginning of "America", not Anita and Bernardo; the boys are not in the number at all. Show business legend has it that the men were omitted from the number in the stage version because of an error in scheduling. Robbins, typically, blamed the male dancers, and this was his way of punishing them.The lyrics of "America" are different in the film as is some of the dialog leading up to it.In the stage show, at Doc's drug store, it is the song "Cool" that is sung and in the garage it is "Gee, Officer Krupke", but they were switched in the film at the request of lyricist Stephen Sondheim as the songs were changed in order related more to the situations at those points in the film.On stage, it is Riff who sings "Cool" and Action who sings "Gee, Officer Krupke."In one part of "Gee, Officer Krupke", the lyrics were changed. The line "My daddy beats my mommy, my mommy clobbers me" appears in the film but in the stage musical it was "My father is a bastard, my mom's an S.O.B.".On stage, during the Quintet, Riff sings to Tony, not Ice. (Ice was actually a character created for the film and was not present in the original Broadway production.)On stage, during the Quintet, Anita sings about Bernardo, "He'll come home hot and tired, so what? No matter if he's tired, as long as he's hot." In the film, the lyrics were changed to, "He'll come home hot and tired, poor dear. No matter if he's tired, as long as he's here.""I Feel Pretty" appears at the beginning of Act II after the rumble in the stage musical.Action takes over as leader of the Jets in the stage show, not Ice.The character of Ice [Tucker Smith], who was written for the movie, was named Diesel in the stage show.The stage show features 11 Jets (including Tony) and 10 Sharks. The film features 12 Jets and 11 Sharks with the additions of Joyboy and Chile, respectively.The stage show Sharks named Anxious, Nibbles and Moose are renamed Rocco, Del Campo and Loco in the film.Academy Award for Best Picture  Robert Wise, producerAcademy Award for Best Supporting Actor  George ChakirisAcademy Award for Best Supporting Actress  Rita MorenoAcademy Award for Best Art Direction (Set Decoration, Color)  Victor A. Gangelin and Boris LevenAcademy Award for Best Cinematography (Color)  Daniel L. FappAcademy Award for Best Costume Design (Color)  Irene SharaffAcademy Award for Best Director  Robert Wise and Jerome RobbinsAcademy Award for Best Film Editing  Thomas StanfordAcademy Award for Best Original Score  Saul Chaplin, Johnny Green, Irwin Kostal, and Sid RaminAcademy Award for Best Sound  Fred Hynes (Todd-AO SSD), and Gordon E. Sawyer (Samuel Goldwyn SSD)Academy Award for Best Writing (Adapted Screenplay)  Ernest LehmanAcademy Award for Brilliant Achievements in the Art of Choreography on Film  Jerome RobbinsAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  #41AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions  #3AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs:

"Somewhere"  #20
"America"  #35
"Tonight"  #59

"Somewhere"  #20"America"  #35"Tonight"  #59AFI's Greatest Movie Musicals  #2AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #51"Somewhere"  #20"America"  #35"Tonight"  #59Official websiteWest Side Story at the Internet Movie DatabaseWest Side Story at the TCM Movie DatabaseWest Side Story at AllRoviWest Side Story at Rotten TomatoesOfficial West Side Story site for all incarnationsRear Window is a 1954 American suspense film directed by Alfred Hitchcock, written by John Michael Hayes and based on Cornell Woolrich's 1942 short story "It Had to Be Murder". Originally released by Paramount Pictures, the film stars James Stewart, Grace Kelly, Wendell Corey, Thelma Ritter and Raymond Burr. It was screened at 1954 Venice Film Festival.The film is considered by many filmgoers, critics and scholars to be one of Hitchcock's best.[3] The film received four Academy Award nominations and was ranked #42 on AFI's 100 Years100 Movies list and #48 on the 10th-anniversary edition. In 1997, Rear Window was added to the United States National Film Registry.After breaking his leg during a dangerous assignment, professional photographer L.B. "Jeff" Jefferies (James Stewart) is confined in his Greenwich Village apartment, using a wheelchair while he recuperates. His rear window looks out onto a small courtyard and several other apartments. During a summer heat wave, he passes the time by watching his neighbors, who keep their windows open to stay cool. The tenants he can see include a dancer he nicknames "Miss Torso", a lonely woman he nicknames "Miss Lonelyheart", a songwriter, several married couples, a middle-aged sculptor, and Lars Thorwald (Raymond Burr), a wholesale jewelry salesman with a bedridden wife.After Thorwald and his wife apparently have an argument, Thorwald makes repeated late-night trips carrying his sample case. Jeff notices that Thorwald's wife is gone and sees Thorwald cleaning a large knife and handsaw. Later, Thorwald ties a large packing crate with heavy rope and has moving men haul it away. Jeff discusses these observations with his wealthy socialite girlfriend Lisa Fremont (Grace Kelly) and his insurance company home-care nurse Stella (Thelma Ritter), and becomes obsessed with their theory that Thorwald murdered his wife. He explains their theory to his friend Tom Doyle (Wendell Corey), a New York City Police detective, and asks him to find out whether anyone actually picks up the packing crate. Doyle looks into the situation but finds nothing suspicious, and discovers that "Mrs. Thorwald" picked up the packing crate. After Doyle leaves, Jeff asks Lisa if she thinks it was ethical for him to spy on his neighbor with binoculars and a telephoto lens; Lisa replies that she doesn't know much about "rear window ethics" but comments on their morbid curiosity by asking, "Whatever happened to that old saying, 'Love thy neighbor'?"Soon after, a neighbor's dog is found dead with its neck broken. When the owner sees the lifeless body of her dog she screams to the courtyard: "You don't know the meaning of the word 'neighbors'. Neighbors like each other, speak to each other, care if anybody lives or dies! But none of you do!" and cries in grief. During the woman's hysterics, the neighbors all rush to their windows to see what has happened, except for Thorwald, whose cigar can be seen glowing as he sits in his dark apartment. Convinced that Thorwald is guilty after all, Jeff has Lisa slip an accusatory note under Thorwald's door so Jeff can watch his reaction when he reads it. Then, as a pretext to get Thorwald away from his apartment, Jeff telephones him and arranges a meeting at a bar. He thinks Thorwald may have buried something in the courtyard flower patch and then killed the dog to keep it from digging it up. When Thorwald leaves, Lisa and Stella dig up the flowers but find nothing.Lisa then climbs the fire escape to Thorwald's apartment and squeezes in through an open window. When Thorwald returns and grabs Lisa, Jeff calls the police, who arrive in time to save her. With the police present, Jeff sees Lisa with her hands behind her back, wiggling her finger with Mrs. Thorwald's wedding ring on it. Thorwald also sees this, realizes that she is signaling to someone, and notices Jeff across the courtyard.Jeff phones Doyle, now convinced that Thorwald is guilty of something, and Stella heads for the police station to post bail for Lisa, leaving Jeff alone. He soon realizes that Thorwald is coming to his apartment. When Thorwald enters the apartment and approaches him, Jeff repeatedly sets off his camera flashbulbs, temporarily blinding Thorwald. Thorwald grabs Jeff and pushes him toward the open window as Jeff yells for help. Jeff falls to the ground just as some police officers enter the apartment and others run to catch him. Thorwald confesses the murder of his wife and the police arrest him.A few days later, the heat has lifted and Jeff rests peacefully in his wheelchair, now with casts on both legs. The lonely neighbor woman chats with the songwriter in his apartment, the dancer's lover returns home from the army, the couple whose dog was killed have a new dog, and the newly married couple are bickering. In the last scene of the film, Lisa reclines beside Jeff, appearing to read a book on foreign travel in order to please him, but as soon as he is asleep, she puts the book down and happily opens a fashion magazine.Director Alfred Hitchcock makes his traditional cameo appearance in the songwriter's apartment, where he is seen winding a clock.The film was shot entirely at Paramount studios, including an enormous set on one of the soundstages, and filmed in Technicolor.[4] There was also careful use of sound, including natural sounds and music drifting across the apartment building courtyard to James Stewart's apartment. At one point, the voice of Bing Crosby can be heard singing "To See You Is to Love You", originally from the 1952 Paramount film Road to Bali. Also heard on the soundtrack are versions of songs popularized earlier in the decade by Nat King Cole ("Mona Lisa", 1950) and Dean Martin ("That's Amore", 1952), along with segments from Leonard Bernstein's score for Jerome Robbins's ballet Fancy Free (1944), Richard Rodgers's song "Lover" (1932), and "M'appari tutt'amor" from Friedrich von Flotow's opera Martha (1844).Hitchcock used costume designer Edith Head on all of his Paramount films.Although veteran Hollywood composer Franz Waxman is credited with the score for the film, his contributions were limited to the opening and closing titles and the piano tune ("Lisa") played by one of the neighbors, a composer (Ross Bagdasarian), during the film. This was Waxman's final score for Hitchcock. The director used primarily "diegetic" sounds sounds arising from the normal life of the characters throughout the film.[5]The camera that features prominently in the film can be identified as a 35mm Exakta Varex VX with a Kilfitt Fern-Kilar f/5.6 400mm lens.[6]A "benefit world premiere" for the film, with United Nations officials and "prominent members of the social and entertainment worlds"[7] in attendance, was held on August 4, 1954 in New York City, with proceeds going to the American-Korean Foundation (an aid organization founded soon after the end of the Korean War[8] and headed by President Eisenhower's brother).The movie went on to earn an estimated $5.3 million in rentals at the North American box office in 1954.[9]The film received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics and is considered one of Hitchcock's finest films. On the website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has been universally praised, garnering a 100% certified fresh rating, based on 61 reviews, with the overall consensus stating that "Hitchcock exerted full potential of suspense in this masterpiece."Critic Bosley Crowther of The New York Times attended that premiere, and in his review called the film a "tense and exciting exercise"[7] and Hitchcock a director whose work has a "maximum of build-up to the punch, a maximum of carefully tricked deception and incidents to divert and amuse." Crowther also notes:Time called it "just possibly the second most entertaining picture (after The 39 Steps) ever made by Alfred Hitchcock" and a film in which there is "never an instant... when Director Hitchcock is not in minute and masterly control of his material."[10] The same review did note "occasional studied lapses of taste and, more important, the eerie sense a Hitchcock audience has of reacting in a manner so carefully foreseen as to seem practically foreordained."[10] Variety called the film "one of Alfred Hitchcock's better thrillers" which "combines technical and artistic skills in a manner that makes this an unusually good piece of murder mystery entertainment."[11]Nearly 30 years after the film's initial release, Roger Ebert reviewed the Universal re-release in October 1983, after Hitchcock's estate was settled. He said the film "develops such a clean, uncluttered line from beginning to end that we're drawn through it (and into it) effortlessly. The experience is not so much like watching a movie, as like... well, like spying on your neighbors. Hitchcock traps us right from the first... And because Hitchcock makes us accomplices in Stewart's voyeurism, we're along for the ride. When an enraged man comes bursting through the door to kill Stewart, we can't detach ourselves, because we looked too, and so we share the guilt and in a way we deserve what's coming to him."[12]Hitchcock's fans and film scholars have taken particular interest in the way the relationship between Jeff and Lisa can be compared to the lives of the neighbors they are spying upon. The film invites speculation as to which of these paths Jeff and Lisa will follow. Many of these points are considered in Tania Modleski's feminist theory book, The Women Who Knew Too Much:[13]The characters themselves verbally point out a similarity between Lisa and Miss Torso (played by Georgine Darcy).Other analyses, including that of Franois Truffaut in Cahiers du cinma in 1954, center on the relationship between Jeff and the other side of the apartment block, seeing it as a symbolic relationship between spectator and screen. Film theorist Mary Ann Doane has made the argument[citation needed] that Jeff, representing the audience, becomes obsessed with the screen, where a collection of storylines are played out. This line of analysis has often followed a feminist approach to interpreting the film. Doane, who used Freudian analysis to claim women spectators of a film become "masculinized", pays close attention to how Jeff's rather passive attitude to romance with the elegant Lisa changes when she metaphorically crosses over from the spectator side to the screen: it is only when Lisa seeks out the wedding ring of Thorwald's murdered wife that Jeff shows real passion for her. In the climax, when he is pushed through the window (the screen), he has been forced to become part of the show.In his book, Alfred Hitchcock's "Rear Window", John Belton addresses the underlying issues of voyeurism, scopophilia, patriarchy and feminism that are evident in the film. He quotes "Rear Window's story is "about" spectacle; it explores the fascination with looking and the attraction of that which is being looked at."[14] Generally, Belton's book asserts that there is more to Hitchcock's thriller than what initially meets the eye. These issues that society faces today are all more than just present in the film, they are emphasized and strengthened.Hitchcock uses sound to convey the thematic elements behind Jeff's behavior and the audience's relationship to his subjective point of view. The music in Rear Window is entirely diegetic, and therefore every character in the courtyard hears the sound and acts based on what they hear. Hitchcock is less interested in reality than in how reality is perceived. Thus his use of entirely diegetic sound illustrates the idea that what we see as the audience is real.The film received four Academy Award nominations: Best Director for Alfred Hitchcock, Best Screenplay for John Michael Hayes, Best Cinematography, Color for Robert Burks, Best Sound Recording for Loren L. Ryder, Paramount Pictures.[15] John Michael Hayes won a 1955 Edgar Award for Best Motion Picture.In 1997, Rear Window was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".Rear Window was restored by the team of Robert A. Harris and James C. Katz for its 1999 limited theatrical re-release and the Collector's Edition DVD release in 2000.American Film Institute recognitionOwnership of the copyright in Woolrich's original story was eventually litigated before the United States Supreme Court in Stewart v. Abend, 495 U.S. 207 (1990). The film was copyrighted in 1954 by Patron Inc. a production company set up by Hitchcock and Stewart. As a result, Stewart and Hitchcock's estate became involved in the Supreme Court case, and Sheldon Abend became a producer of the 1998 remake of Rear Window.Rear Window is one of several of Hitchcock's films originally released by Paramount Pictures, for which Hitchcock retained the copyright, and which was later acquired by Universal Studios in 1983 from Hitchcock's estate.Rear Window has been repeatedly re-told, parodied, or referenced.August 1, 1954(1954-08-01)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception5 Analysis6 Legacy7 Ownership8 Influence

8.1 Film
8.2 Television

8.1 Film8.2 Television9 References10 External links8.1 Film8.2 TelevisionJames Stewart as L.B. "Jeff" JefferiesGrace Kelly as Lisa Carol FremontWendell Corey as NYPD Det. Lt. Thomas J. DoyleThelma Ritter as StellaRaymond Burr as Lars ThorwaldJudith Evelyn as Miss LonelyheartsRoss Bagdasarian as the SongwriterGeorgine Darcy as Miss TorsoFrank Cady and Sara Berner as the husband and wife living above the Thorwalds.Jesslyn Fax as Sculptor neighbor with a hearing aidRand Harper as the Newlywed manIrene Winston as Mrs. Anna ThorwaldHavis Davenport as the Newlywed womanThorwald and his wife are a reversal of Jeff and Lisa Thorwald looks after his invalid wife just as Lisa looks after the invalid Jeff. Also, Thorwald's hatred of his nagging wife mirrors Jeff's arguments with Lisa.The newlywed couple initially seem perfect for each other (they spend nearly the entire movie in their bedroom with the blinds drawn), but at the end we see their marriage deteriorate as the wife begins to nag the husband. Similarly, Jeff is afraid of being 'tied down' by marriage to Lisa.The middle-aged couple with the dog seem content living at home. They have the kind of uneventful lifestyle that horrifies Jeff.The Songwriter, a music composer, and Miss Lonelyhearts, a depressed spinster, lead frustrated lives, and at the end of the movie find comfort in each other: The composer's new tune draws Miss Lonelyhearts away from suicide, and the composer thus finds value in his work. There is a subtle hint in this tale that Lisa and Jeff are meant for each other, despite his stubbornness. The piece the composer creates is called "Lisa's Theme" in the credits.Miss Torso, a beautiful dancer, initially seems to live a carefree bohemian lifestyle and often has various men over at her apartment. In the end, however, it is revealed that she has been waiting for her sweetheart, a slight-framed and boyish soldier, to return.AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #42AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills #14AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

L.B. "Jeff" Jeffries Nominated Hero
Lars Thorwald Nominated Villain

L.B. "Jeff" Jeffries Nominated HeroLars Thorwald Nominated VillainAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #48AFI's 10 Top 10 #3 Mystery Film[16]L.B. "Jeff" Jeffries Nominated HeroLars Thorwald Nominated VillainThe Brian De Palma film Body Double (1984) pays homage to Rear Window, and also borrows from Hitchcock's Vertigo.[citation needed]Michael Davis's Eight Days a Week (1999) pays tribute where the main character, who camps out in the front lawn of the girl he has a crush on over the summer and refuses to leave until they get together, notices the man across the street frequently take garbage bags out of his house but never sees the man's wife anymore. He fears the man killed his wife and is taking the body out, piece by piece.Robert Zemeckis's What Lies Beneath (2000) pays tribute to this film and other Hitchcock features.[citation needed]The character of Owen in Let Me In is influenced by the character of Jeff.[citation needed]Disturbia (2007) is a modern day retelling, with the protagonist (Shia LaBeouf) under house arrest instead of laid up with a broken leg, and who believes that his neighbor is a serial killer rather than having committed a single murder. On September 5, 2008, the Sheldon Abend Trust sued Steven Spielberg, Dreamworks, Viacom, and Universal Studios, alleging that the producers of Disturbia violated the copyright to the original Woolrich story owned by Abend.[17][18] On September 21, 2010, the U.S. District Court in Abend v. Spielberg, 748 F.Supp.2d 200 (S.D.N.Y. 2010), ruled that Disturbia did not infringe the original Woolrich story.[19]The set of the film was the basis for a comedy sketch on a 2009 episode of Saturday Night Live. The sketch featured Jason Sudeikis as Jimmy Stewart and January Jones as a flatulent Grace Kelly whose persistent farting made it impossible to finish filming the scene. Bobby Moynihan was also featured as Alfred Hitchcock. [20]Rear Window was remade as a television movie of the same name in 1998, with an updated storyline in which the lead character is paralyzed and lives in a high-tech home filled with assistive technology. Actor Christopher Reeve, himself paralyzed as the result of a 1995 horse-riding accident, was cast in the lead role. The telefilm also starred Daryl Hannah, Robert Forster, Ruben Santiago-Hudson and Anne Twomey. It aired November 22, 1998 on the ABC television network.In one sketch from Monty Python's Flying Circus, fictional filmmaker L. F. Dibley (Terry Jones), who makes extremely short ripoffs of more famous films, makes one based on Rear Window - with the same title - which consists of a single shot of a man's apartment as he looks out his window, sees a murder, re-enters his apartment to presumably fend off the murderer, and then reemerges to show he's alive. Dibley comments, "Alfred Hitchcock - who's supposed to be so bloody wonderful - padded that out to one-and-a-half hours! Lost all the tension. Just because he had bloody Grace Kelly, three million pounds more than I did! Mind you, at least she can act a bit; I could've done with her in Finian's Rainbow..."[citation needed]The Simpsons spoofed Rear Window in the episode Bart of Darkness which takes place during the summer. The Simpsons get a swimming pool and Bart later breaks his leg, forcing him to spend time in his bedroom with his leg in a cast. Like Jeff in Rear Window, Bart uses a telescope and watches the residents of Springfield from his bedroom window. He suspects Ned Flanders of murdering his wife Maude, only to discover that Ned killed Maude's plant by accident.That '70s Show spoofed Rear Window, along with other Hitchcock films, in season 3, episode 4's "Too Old to Trick or Treat, Too Young to Die."[21]The Flintstones spoofed Rear Window in season 2, episode 4's "Alvin Brickrock Presents"[22]The Mathnet episode "View from the Rear Terrace" has Kate Monday in a similar situation to Jeffries after breaking her leg for undisclosed reasons, and she starts spying on her next-door neighbor, named "Raymond Sticker."The White Collar episode "Neighborhood Watch" drew various themes from Rear Window.[23]The Home Movies episode "Definite Possible Murder" has a similar plot.The CSI: NY TV series pays homage Rear Window in the episode Point of view. Mac Taylor is recovering at home following a fall from chasing a murderer. During his recovery, he witnesses some mysterious behaviour in the apartment building across the way which leads to a murder involving a former university professor.The Detectives spoofed Rear Window in the series 2 episode also titled "Rear Window".Rear Window at the Internet Movie DatabaseRear Window at Rotten TomatoesRear Window at the TCM Movie DatabaseRear Window at AllRoviRear Window at Box Office MojoDetailed reviewKing Kong is a pre-Code 1933 American monster/adventure film directed and produced by Merian C. Cooper and Ernest B. Schoedsack. The screenplay by James Ashmore Creelman and Ruth Rose was from an idea conceived by Cooper and Edgar Wallace. It stars Fay Wray, Bruce Cabot and Robert Armstrong, and opened in New York City on March 2, 1933 to rave reviews.The film tells of a gigantic island-dwelling ape creature called Kong who dies in an attempt to possess a beautiful young woman. Kong is distinguished for its stop-motion animation by Willis O'Brien and its musical score by Max Steiner. The film has been released to video, DVD, and Blu-ray Disc, and has been computer colorized.[2] In 1991, the film was deemed "culturally, historically and aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. It has been remade twice: once in 1976 and again in 2005.In New York harbor, Carl Denham (Robert Armstrong), a fierce independent film director famous for shooting animal pictures in remote and exotic locations, has recruited a bunch of macho seamen, but is unable to hire an actress for his newest project. His usual agent, Charles Weston refuses to supply anyone because of the dangerous nature of the expedition, so Carl goes wandering in the streets of New York searching for a suitable girl. He chances upon starving unemployed Ann Darrow (Fay Wray) and tries to convince her to join him on the adventure of a lifetime, offering her the lead in his project. Although Ann is apprehensive, she has nothing to lose and agrees.They set sail aboard the Venture, a tramp steamer, and travel for weeks in the direction of Indonesia, where Denham claims they will be shooting. Despite his ongoing declarations that women have no place on board ships, the ship's first mate, Jack Driscoll (Bruce Cabot) is obviously becoming attracted to Ann. Denham informs Driscoll he has enough trouble without the complications of a seagoing love affair. Driscoll sneers at the suggestion, reminding Denham of his toughness in past adventures.Denham's reply outlines the theme of the movie he is making: "The Beast was a tough guy too. He could lick the world, but when he saw Beauty, she got him. He went soft. He forgot his wisdom and the little fellas licked him."After maintaining secrecy for weeks, Denham finally tells Driscoll and Captain Englehorn (Frank Reicher) that they're searching for an uncharted island shown on a map in Denham's possession. Denham then describes something monstrous connected to the island, a legendary entity known to the islanders only as "Kong".As the Venture creeps through the fog surrounding the island, the crew hears drums in the distance. Arriving at the island's shore, they see a native village on a peninsula, cut off from the bulk of the island by an enormous stone wall. A landing party, including the filming crew and Ann, goes ashore and encounters the natives, who are about to hand over a girl to Kong as a ritual sacrifice.The native chief spots them, getting a clear look at Ann, and proposes to swap six native women for her. Denham delicately declines as he and his party edge away from the scene, assuring the chief that they will return tomorrow to get better acquainted.However, later that night, a stealthy contingent of natives captures Ann, takes her back to the wall, where she is presented to Kong in an elaborate ceremony, leaving her tied to columns behind the wall. Soon after, Kong emerges through the trees and is revealed to be a giant gorilla, who carries off Ann deep into the jungle.The Venture crew returns to the village and open the huge gate on the wall; half of the crew then go after Kong in hopes of rescuing Ann from his clutches. While venturing through the dense jungles, the crew discover that not only does Kong live on the island, but also prehistoric dinosaurs that have somehow escaped extinction and have continued to evolve throughout the centuries such as enraged Stegosaurus, a territorial Brontosaurus, a Snake-like Plesiosaurus and a hungry Tyrannosaurus Rex who tries to eat Ann, but Kong fights and eventually defeats it.Jack, after braving through the many obstacles the island has to offer, rescues Ann and takes her back to the village, but Kong chases after them, breaks through the large door in the wall and rampages through the village, killing many natives. Denham hurls gas bombs at Kong, knocking him out, whereupon he exults in the opportunity presented: "We're millionaires, boys! I'll share it with all of you! Why, in a few months, his name will be up in lights on Broadway! Kong! The Eighth Wonder of the World!"The next scene shows those last words in lights on a theater marquee. Along with hundreds of curious New Yorkers, Denham, Driscoll and Ann are dressed in evening wear for the gala event. The curtain lifts, and Denham presents a subdued and shackled Kong to the stunned audience. All goes well until photographers, using the blinding flashbulbs of the era, begin snapping shots of Ann and Jack, who is now her fianc. Under the impression that the flashbulbs are attacking Ann, Kong breaks free of his bonds and escapes from the theater as the screaming audience flees.He rampages through city streets, destroying an elevated train and killing several citizens. He looks into windows, his glaring eyes looming in the windows of the wrecked elevated train Kong sees Ann in an upper floor hotel room, he reaches in the window, grabs her, and carries her to the top of the Empire State Building. He gets into a battle with a squadron of military airplanes and despite taking one of them down is wounded by gunfire and falls to his death. Ann is reunited with Driscoll. Below on the street, Denham makes his way through the gathered crowd to look upon the fallen Kong. A police lieutenant says to him "Well Denham, the airplanes got him." The film ends with Carl Denham's famous reply, "Oh, no, it wasn't the airplanes...it was Beauty killed the Beast."Before King Kong hit the silver screen, a long tradition of jungle films existed, and, whether drama or documentary, such films generally adhered to a narrative pattern that followed an explorer or scientist into the jungle to test a theory only to discover some monstrous aberration in the undergrowth. In such films, scientific knowledge could be turned topsy-turvy at any time and it was this that provided the genre with its vitality, appeal, and endurance.[3]At the turn of the 19th to 20th century, the Lumire Brothers sent film documentarians to places westerners had never seen, and Georges Mlis utilized trick photography in film fantasies that prefigured that in King Kong. Jungle films were launched in the United States in 1913 with Beasts in the Jungle, a film that mixed live actors with lions, a tiger, and other animals. The film's popularity spawned similar pictures, including a few about "ape men" and gorillas. In 1918, Elmo Lincoln starred in Tarzan of the Apes,[3] and, in 1925, The Lost World made movie history with special effects by Willis O'Brien and a crew that later would work on King Kong.[4]The little-known but recently partially rediscovered Mascot Pictures 1927 movie serial Isle of Sunken Gold may have provided fundamental inspirations for story and character elements of King Kong  it featured shipwrecked sailors on a remote island, and a seafaring hero (Bruce Gordon) clad in white who fights to protect the scantily clad heroine (Anita Stewart) from primitive natives and their deity, a cave-dwelling fanged ape named "Kong."[citation needed]Cooper's fascination with gorillas began with his boyhood reading of Paul du Chaillu's Explorations and Adventures in Equatorial Africa (1861) and was furthered in 1929 by studying a tribe of baboons in Africa while filming The Four Feathers. After reading W. Douglas Burden's The Dragon Lizards of Komodo, he fashioned a scenario depicting African gorillas battling Komodo dragons intercut with artificial stand-ins for joint shots. He then narrowed the dramatis personae to one ferocious, lizard-battling gorilla (rather than a group) and included a lone woman on expedition to appease those critics who belabored him for neglecting romance in his films. A remote island would be the setting and the gorilla would be dealt a spectacular death in New York City.[5]Cooper took his concept to Paramount Studios in the first years of the Great Depression but executives shied away from a project that sent film crews on costly shoots to Africa and Komodo. In 1931, David O. Selznick brought Cooper to RKO as his executive assistant, and, to sweeten the deal, promised him he could make his own films. Cooper began immediately developing The Most Dangerous Game, a story about a big game hunter, and hired his friend and former film partner Ernest Schoedsack to direct. A huge jungle stage set was built and Robert Armstrong and Fay Wray were the picture's stars. Once the film was underway, Cooper turned his attention to the studio's big-budget-out-of-control fantasy, Creation, a story about a group of travelers shipwrecked on an island of dinosaurs. The film had special effects wizard Willis O'Brien on board.[6]When Cooper screened O'Brien's stop-motion Creation footage, he was unimpressed but realized he could economically make his gorilla picture by scrapping the Komodo dragons and costly location shoots for O'Brien's animated dinosaurs and the studio's existing jungle set. It was at this time Cooper probably cast his gorilla as a giant named Kong, and would have him die at the Empire State Building. The RKO board was wary about the project but gave its approval after Cooper organized a presentation with Wray, Armstrong, and Cabot, and O'Brien's model dinosaurs. In his executive capacity, Cooper ordered the Creation production shelved and put its crew to work on Kong.[7]Merian C. Cooper wanted King Kong to be more of an ape, but Willis O'Brien wanted King Kong to be more of a human being. A compromise was met with King Kong being made into an apeman. This was Brien's third time creating an apeman, as he had previously created an apeman for his short film The Dinosaur and the Missing Link: A Prehistoric Tragedy and The Lost World.Cooper assigned recently hired RKO screenwriter and best-selling British mystery/adventure writer Edgar Wallace the job of writing a screenplay and a novel based on his gorilla fantasy. Cooper understood the commercial appeal of Wallace's name and planned to publicize the film as being "based on the novel by Edgar Wallace". Wallace conferred with Cooper and O'Brien (who contributed, among other things, the "Ann's dress" scene) and began work on January 1, 1932. He completed a rough draft called The Beast on January 5, 1932. Cooper thought the draft needed considerable work but Wallace died on February 10, 1932 just after beginning revisions.[3][8] Cooper insisted however that Wallace died having written "not one bloody word," and that he gave the writer a screen credit simply because as producer he had promised him one.[9]Cooper called in James A. Creelman (who was working on the script of The Most Dangerous Game at the time) and the two men worked together on several drafts under the title The Eighth Wonder. Some details from Wallace's rough draft were dropped, notably his boatload of escaped convicts. Wallace's Danby Denham character, a big game hunter, became film director Carl Denham. His Shirley became Ann Darrow and her lover-convict John became Jack Driscoll. The 'beauty and the beast' angle was first developed at this time. Kong's escape was switched from Madison Square Garden to Yankee Stadium and (finally) to a Broadway theater. Cute moments involving the gorilla in Wallace's draft were cut because Cooper wanted Kong hard and tough in the belief that his fall would be all the more awesome and tragic.[8]Time constraints forced Creelman to temporarily drop The Eighth Wonder and devote his time to the Game script. RKO staff writer Horace McCoy was called in to work with Cooper, and it was then that the island natives, a giant wall, and the sacrificial maidens entered the plot. When Creelman returned to the script full-time, he hated these 'mythic elements', believing the script already had too many over-the-top concepts. RKO head Selznick and his executives wanted Kong introduced earlier in the film (believing the audience would grow bored waiting for his appearance), but Cooper persuaded them that a suspenseful build-up would make Kong's entrance all the more exciting.[10]Cooper felt Creelman's final draft was slow-paced, too full of flowery dialogue, weighted-down with long scenes of exposition,[10] and written on a scale that would have been prohibitively expensive to film.[9] Writer Ruth Rose (Mrs. Ernest Schoedsack) was brought in to clean things up and, although she had never written a screenplay, undertook the task with a complete understanding of Cooper's style. She streamlined the script and tightened the action. Rather than explaining how Kong would be transported to New York, for example, she simply cut from the island to the theater. She incorporated autobiographical elements into the script with Cooper mirrored in the Denham character, her husband Schoedsack in the tough but tender Driscoll character, and herself in struggling actress Ann Darrow. She rewrote the dialogue to give it some zip and created the film's entire opening chunk showing Denham plucking Ann from the streets of New York. Cooper was delighted with Rose's script, added the Arab proverb seen on the screen at the beginning, and approved the script (now called Kong) for production.[11] Cooper and Schoedsack decided to co-direct scenes but their styles were different (Cooper was slow and meticulous, Schoedsack brisk) and they finally agreed to work separately with Cooper directing the miniature and special effects scenes and Schoedsack directing the live-action scenes.[12]Canadian-born Fay Wray played bit parts in Hollywood until cast as the lead in Erich von Stroheim's 1928 silent film, The Wedding March. She met Kong co-directors Cooper and Schoedsack when cast as Ethne Eustace in The Four Feathers in 1929. Cooper cast her in 1932 as Eve Trowbridge in The Most Dangerous Game.[13]After the RKO board approved the Kong test, Cooper decided a blonde would provide contrast to the gorilla's dark pelt. Dorothy Jordan, Jean Harlow, and Ginger Rogers were considered, but the role finally went to Wray who wore a blonde wig in the film and was inspired more by Cooper's enthusiasm than the script to accept the role. According to her autobiography, On the Other Hand, Wray recounts that Cooper had told her he planned to star her opposite the "tallest, darkest leading man in Hollywood". She assumed he meant Clark Gable until he showed her a picture of Kong climbing the Empire State Building.[13]Wray recorded all her screams in one afternoon session during post-production.[14] She appeared in two other horror films released about the same time as Kong, and, as a result, was labelled a "scream queen" by critics and movie-goers.[15] On the film's 50th anniversary in 1983, one New York theater held a Fay Wray scream-alike contest in its lobby,[16] and, two days after her death on August 8, 2004, the lights of the Empire State Building were dimmed for 15 minutes in her memory.[17]Michigan native and veteran Broadway and silent film character actor Robert Armstrong played Wray's alcoholic brother in The Most Dangerous Game and, during filming, became a member of the Cooper-Schoedsack inner circle. He was a shoo-in as Denham when Kong was cast.[13] The film's romantic angle (rather than its jungle or animal angle) was played-up after animal films fared poorly at the box office in the early months of 1933. One exhibitor displayed a promotional still of Wray swooning in Armstrong's arms with the caption, "Their Hearts Stood Still...For There Stood Kong! A Love Story of Today That Spans the Ages!". Although the film's romantic subplot belongs to Cabot and Wray, established star Armstrong was chosen for the ad rather than the unknown Cabot.[18] Months later, Armstrong again played Carl Denham in Kong's sequel, The Son of Kong (1933).[19]New Mexico native Jacques De Bujac was signed by Selznick as a contract player, given the name Bruce Cabot, and met Cooper when auditioning for The Most Dangerous Game. He almost walked out of his Kong audition (mistakenly believing he was trying out as a stunt double for Joel McCrea) but was convinced otherwise and received the role of Jack Driscoll, his first starring role.[20] He was an inexperienced actor and described his participation in Kong as standing in the right place, doing what he was told, and collecting a paycheck.[21]German-born Broadway veteran and silent film director Frank Reicher was cast as Captain Englehorn of the SS Venture, Victor Wong as the ship's cook Charlie, James Flavin as Second Mate Briggs, and a host of stuntmen and bit players as the ship's crew. Noble Johnson and Steve Clemente were members of the Cooper-Schoedsack inner circle and cast as the Native Chief and the Witch Doctor respectively while Etta McDaniel played mother of a child she rescues from Kong's rampage. Sam Hardy was cast as a theatrical agent and Sandra Shaw (later Mrs. Gary Cooper) was cast as the New York woman Kong drops to the street from the hotel ledge. Cooper, who was shot down in World War I in a Airco DH.4 and made a prisoner of war by the Germans, and who later flew with the Kosciuszko Squadron, played the airplane pilot and Schoedsack the machine gunner in uncredited roles in the film's final scenes.[22]After the RKO board approved the production of a test reel, Marcel Delgado constructed Kong (or the "Giant Terror Gorilla" as he was then known) per designs and directions from Cooper and O'Brien on a one-inch-equals-one-foot scale to simulate a gorilla 18 feet tall. Four models were built: two jointed 18-inch aluminum, foam rubber, latex, and rabbit fur models (to be rotated during filming), one jointed 24-inch model of the same materials for the New York scenes, and a small model of lead and fur for the tumbling-down-the-Empire-State-Building scene. Kong's torso was streamlined to eliminate the comical appearance of the real world gorilla's prominent belly and butt. His lips, eyebrows, and nose were fashioned of rubber, his eyes of glass, and his facial expressions controlled by thin, bendable wires threaded through holes drilled in his aluminum skull. During filming, Kong's rubber skin dried out quickly under studio lights, making it necessary to replace it often and completely rebuild his facial features.[23]A huge bust of Kong's head, neck, and upper chest was made of wood, cloth, rubber, and bearskin by Delgado, E. B. Gibson, and Fred Reefe. Inside the structure, metal levers, hinges, and an air compressor were operated by three men to control the mouth and facial expressions. Its fangs were 10-inches in length and its eyeballs 12-inches. The bust was moved from set to set on a flatcar. Its scale matched none of the models and, if fully realized, Kong would have stood thirty to forty feet tall.[24]Two versions of Kong's right hand and arm were constructed of steel, sponge rubber, rubber, and bearskin. The first hand was nonarticulated, mounted on a crane, and operated by grips for the scene in which Kong grabs at Driscoll in the cave. The other hand and arm had articulated fingers, was mounted on a lever to elevate it, and was used in the several scenes in which Kong grasps Ann. A nonarticulated leg was created of materials similar to the hands, mounted on a crane, and used to stomp on Kong's victims.[25]The dinosaurs were made by Delgado in the same fashion as Kong and based on Charles R. Knight's murals in the American Museum of Natural History in New York City. All the armatures were manufacted in the RKO machine shop. Materials used were cotton, foam rubber, latex sheeting, and liquid latex. Football bladders were placed inside some models to simulate breathing. A scale of one-inch-equals-one-foot was employed and models ranged from 18-inches to 3-feet in length. Several of the models were originally built for Creation and sometimes two or three models were built of individual species. Prolonged exposure to studio lights wreaked havoc with the latex skin so John Cerasoli carved wooden duplicates of each model to be used as stand-ins for test shoots and lineups. He carved wooden models of Ann, Driscoll, and other human characters. Models of the Venture, subway cars, and fighter planes were built.[27]King Kong was filmed in several stages over an eight-month period. Some actors had so much time between their Kong periods, they worked other films. Cabot completed Road House and Wray appeared in the horror films, Dr. X and Mystery of the Wax Museum. She estimated she worked ten weeks on Kong over its eight-month period.In MayJune 1932, Cooper directed the first live-action Kong scenes on the jungle set built for The Most Dangerous Game. Some of these scenes were incorporated into the test reel later exhibited for the RKO board. The script was still in revision when the jungle scenes were shot and much of the dialogue was improvised. The jungle set was scheduled to be struck after Game was completed so Cooper filmed all the other jungle scenes at this time. The last scene shot was that of Driscoll and Ann racing through the jungle to safety following their escape from Kong's lair.In July 1932, the native village was readied while Schoedsack and his crew filmed establishing shots in the harbor of New York City. Curtiss O2C-1 Helldiver fighter planes taking off and in flight were filmed at a U.S. Naval airfield on Long Island. Views of New York City were filmed from the Empire State Building for backgrounds in the final scenes and architectural plans for the mooring mast were secured from the building's owners for a mock-up to be constructed on the Hollywood soundstage.[28]In August 1932, the island landing party scene and the gas bomb scene were filmed south of Los Angeles on a beach at San Pedro, California. All of the native village scenes were then filmed on the RKO-Path lot in Culver City with native huts recycled from Bird of Paradise (1932). The great wall in the island scenes was a hand-me-down from DeMille's The King of Kings (1927) and dressed up with massive gates, a gong, and primitive carvings. The scene of Ann being led through the gates to the sacrificial altar was filmed at night with hundreds of extras and 350 lights for illumination. A camera was mounted on a crane to follow Ann to the altar. The Culver City Fire Department was on hand to do their job should the set go up in flames from the many native torches used in the scene (the wall and gate were destroyed in 1939 for Gone With the Wind's burning of Atlanta sequence). Kong's rampage through the village was filmed (again, with hundreds of extras) and filming was completed with individual vignettes of mayhem and native panic.Meanwhile, the scene depicting a New York woman being dropped to her apparent death from a hotel window was filmed on the soundstage using the articulated hand. At the same time, a scene depicting poker players surprised by Kong's face peering through a window was filmed using the 'big head'; the scene was eventually dropped.[29] When filming was completed, a break was scheduled to finish the interior sets and to allow screenwriter Ruth Rose time to finish the script.In SeptemberOctober 1932, Schoedsack returned to the soundstage after completing the native village shoots in Culver City. The decks and cabins of the Venture were constructed and all the live-action shipboard scenes were then filmed. The New York scenes were filmed, including the scene of Ann being plucked from the streets by Denham and the diner scene. Following the interior scenes, Schoedsack returned to San Pedro and spent a day on a tramp steamer to film the Driscoll-slugs-Ann scene and various harbor atmosphere scenes. The Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles was rented for one day to film the on-stage scenes with Kong in chains and the backstage theater scenes following his escape.[30] Principal photography wrapped at the end of October 1932 with the Driscoll-rescues-Ann scene at the top of the Empire State Building. Schoedsack's work was completed and he headed to Syria to film outdoor scenes for Arabia, a project that eventually remained uncompleted.[31]In December 1932-January 1933, the actors were called back to film the optical effects shots which were mostly rear-screen projections. Technical problems inherent in the process made filming difficult and time-consuming. Wray spent most of a twenty-two hour period sitting in a fake tree to witness the battle between Kong and a T. rex. She was sore for days after. Many of the scenes featuring Wray in the articulated hand were filmed at this time. In December, Cooper reshot the New York woman falling to her death scene. Stunt doubles were filmed for the water scenes depicting Driscoll and Ann escaping from Kong. A portion of the jungle set was reconstructed to film Denham snagging his sleeve on a branch during the pursuit scene. Originally, Denham ducked behind a bush to escape danger but this was later considered cowardly and the scene reshot. The final scene was originally staged on the top of the Empire State Building but Cooper was dissatified and reshot the scene with Kong lying dead in the street and a crowd gathered about him.King Kong was settled upon as the title and the film cut from 125 to 100 minutes with scenes that slowed the pace or diverted attention from Kong deleted. Probably the most infamous deleted scene was what later became known as the "Spider Pit Sequence", where a number of sailors from the Venture survived a fall into a ravine, only to be eaten alive by various large spiders, insects and other creatures. In a studio memo, Merian C. Cooper said that he cut the scene out himself because it stopped the story. Aside from some still photographs and pre-production artwork, no trace of it has ever been found. Peter Jackson later did a reimagining of this scene for his King Kong movie, and he also shot another version of the scene for fun using stop-motion animation, which was included among the bonus features of the two-disc DVD of the 1933 original.[32]Kong's roars and grunts were created by manipulating the recorded roars of zoo lions. For budget reasons, RKO decided not to have an original film score composed but directed composer Max Steiner to simply reuse music from other films. Cooper thought the film deserved an original score and paid Steiner $50,000 to compose it. Steiner completed the score in six weeks and recorded it with a 46 piece orchestra. The studio later reimbursed Cooper.[33] The score was unlike any that came before and marks a milestone in the history of film music. Steiner experimented with a number of new film scoring techniques, such as the use of leitmotifs.[34]King Kong opened at the 6,200-seat Radio City Music Hall in New York City and the 3,700-seat RKO Roxy across the street on Thursday, March 2, 1933. The film was preceded by a stage show called Jungle Rhythms. Crowds lined up around the block on opening day, tickets were priced at $.35 to $.75, and, in its first four days, every one of its ten-shows-a-day were sold out setting an all-time attendance record for an indoor event. Over the four day period, the film grossed $89,931.[35]The film had its official world premiere on March 23, 1933 at Grauman's Chinese Theater in Hollywood. The 'big head bust' was placed in the theater's forecourt and a seventeen-act show preceded the film with The Dance of the Sacred Ape performed by a troupe of African American dancers the highpoint. Kong cast and crew attended and Wray thought her on-screen screams distracting and excessive. The film opened nationwide on April 10, 1933, and worldwide on Easter Day in London, England.[35]Variety thought the film a powerful adventure.[36] The New York Times gave readers an enthusiastic account of the plot and thought the film a fascinating adventure.[37] The film's subtextual threat to Aryan womanhood got Kong banned in Nazi Germany.[38]In 2002, Roger Ebert wrote that the effects are not up to modern standards, but the film remains one "that still somehow works."[39] In 2009, King Kong held an average score of 100% "Certified Fresh" based on 46 reviews on Rotten Tomatoes.[40]The film made approximately $2 million in its initial release, with an opening weekend estimated at $90,000. As a result, RKO saw a profit for the first time in its five year existence. During the film's first run it made a profit of $650,000.[1] It was re-released in 1938, 1942, 1946, and 1952. After the 1952 re-release, Variety estimated the film had made $4 million in cumulative domestic rentals for that year.[41]Kong did not receive any Academy Awards nominations. Selznick wanted to nominate O'Brien and his crew for a special award in visual effects but the Academy declined. Such a category did not exist at the time and would not exist until 1938. Sidney Saunders and Fred Jackman received a special achievement award for the development of the translucent acetate/cellulose rear screen the only Kong-related award.[42]The film has since received some significant honors. In 1975, Kong was named one of the 50 best American films by the American Film Institute, and, in 1991, the film was deemed "culturally, historically and aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. In 1998, the AFI ranked the film #43 on its list of the 100 greatest movies of all time.[43]American Film Institute ListsKing Kong was re-released in 1938, 1942, 1946, 1952 and 1956 to great box office success. Stricter decency rules had been put into effect in Hollywood since its 1933 premiere and each time it was censored further, with several scenes being either trimmed or excised altogether.These scenes were:[44]After the 1956 re-release, the film was sold to television and played successfully to huge audiences.In 1969, a 16mm print, including the censored footage, was found in Philadelphia. The cut scenes were added to the film, restoring it to its original theatrical running time of 100 minutes. This version was re-released to art houses by Janus Films in 1970.[44]Over the next two decades, King Kong received further photochemical restoration. This was based on a 1942 release print, with missing censor cuts taken from a 1937 print, which "contained heavy vertical scratches from projection."[46]After a 6-year worldwide search for the best surviving materials, a further, fully digital, restoration utilizing 4K resolution scanning was completed in 2005.[47] This restoration also had a 4 minute overture added, bringing the overall running time to 104 minutes.King Kong was also, somewhat controversially, colorized in the late 1980s for television.[48]King Kong was released on Laserdisc in 1984 by the Criterion Collection, and was the very first movie to have an audio commentary track included.King Kong had numerous VHS releases of varying quality prior receiving an official studio release. Those included a 60th anniversary edition in 1993 from Turner Home Entertainment, featuring a front cover which, when his chest was pressed, had a sound effect of Kong roaring. It also included the colorized version of the film and a new 25 minute documentary, It Was Beauty Killed the Beast. The documentary is also available on two different UK King Kong DVDs.In the US, a 2-disc, Special Edition DVD containing the full-digital restoration of King Kong and numerous extra features, was released in late 2005, to coincide with the theatrical release of Peter Jackson's remake. A Blu-ray Disc version of the Special Edition was released in the US in late 2010.[49]As of 2012, all other worldwide DVD releases contain only the earlier, 100 minute, pre-2005 restoration.[47]The 1980s colorized version is available on DVD in the UK and Italy.[50]March 2, 1933(1933-03-02)1 Plot2 Cast3 Creatures4 Background5 Production

5.1 Development

5.1.1 Concept
5.1.2 Script


5.2 Pre-production

5.2.1 Casting

5.2.1.1 Fay Wray
5.2.1.2 Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot
5.2.1.3 Other players


5.2.2 Models
5.2.3 Live-action scenes


5.3 Post-production

5.1 Development

5.1.1 Concept
5.1.2 Script

5.1.1 Concept5.1.2 Script5.2 Pre-production

5.2.1 Casting

5.2.1.1 Fay Wray
5.2.1.2 Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot
5.2.1.3 Other players


5.2.2 Models
5.2.3 Live-action scenes

5.2.1 Casting

5.2.1.1 Fay Wray
5.2.1.2 Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot
5.2.1.3 Other players

5.2.1.1 Fay Wray5.2.1.2 Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot5.2.1.3 Other players5.2.2 Models5.2.3 Live-action scenes5.3 Post-production6 Releases

6.1 Premieres
6.2 Reception
6.3 Box office
6.4 Awards and honors
6.5 Re-releases, censorship and restorations
6.6 Home media

6.1 Premieres6.2 Reception6.3 Box office6.4 Awards and honors6.5 Re-releases, censorship and restorations6.6 Home media7 See also8 References9 External links5.1 Development

5.1.1 Concept
5.1.2 Script

5.1.1 Concept5.1.2 Script5.2 Pre-production

5.2.1 Casting

5.2.1.1 Fay Wray
5.2.1.2 Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot
5.2.1.3 Other players


5.2.2 Models
5.2.3 Live-action scenes

5.2.1 Casting

5.2.1.1 Fay Wray
5.2.1.2 Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot
5.2.1.3 Other players

5.2.1.1 Fay Wray5.2.1.2 Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot5.2.1.3 Other players5.2.2 Models5.2.3 Live-action scenes5.3 Post-production5.1.1 Concept5.1.2 Script5.2.1 Casting

5.2.1.1 Fay Wray
5.2.1.2 Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot
5.2.1.3 Other players

5.2.1.1 Fay Wray5.2.1.2 Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot5.2.1.3 Other players5.2.2 Models5.2.3 Live-action scenes5.2.1.1 Fay Wray5.2.1.2 Robert Armstrong and Bruce Cabot5.2.1.3 Other players6.1 Premieres6.2 Reception6.3 Box office6.4 Awards and honors6.5 Re-releases, censorship and restorations6.6 Home mediaBruce Cabot as Jack DriscollRobert Armstrong as Carl DenhamFay Wray as Ann DarrowFrank Reicher as Captain EnglehornJames Flavin as BriggsVictor Wong as Charlie the CookKing Kong the GorillaStegosaurusBrontosaurusGiant SpiderTyrannosaurus rexPlesiosaurusPteranodonAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  #43AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills  #12AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions  #24AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Kong Nominated Villain

Kong Nominated VillainAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"Oh, no, it wasn't the airplanes. It was Beauty killed the Beast."  #84

"Oh, no, it wasn't the airplanes. It was Beauty killed the Beast."  #84AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  #13AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #41AFI's 10 Top 10  #4 Fantasy filmKong Nominated Villain"Oh, no, it wasn't the airplanes. It was Beauty killed the Beast."  #84A Brontosaurus eating crewmen in the water, chasing one up a tree and eating him (which is inaccurate since it is a herbivous dinosaur);Kong undressing Ann Darrow and sniffing his fingers;Kong biting and stepping on natives when he attacks the village;Kong biting a reporter in New York;Kong mistaking a sleeping woman for Ann and dropping her to her death after realizing his mistake.The most famous scene to be cut from the theatrical release version is the "Spider Pit" sequence, following the scene where Kong shakes his human pursuers off the log bridge and the men fall into the ravine below. In that deleted sequence, the men survive the fall, only to be set upon and devoured alive by giant spiders and other giant-sized vermin. The scene was originally included in the first test screening, but was deleted right afterwards.[45] The 2005 remake includes a recreation of this scene as a tribute to the original.King Kong (1976)King Kong (2005)List of giant monster filmsList of stop-motion filmsMighty Joe Young (1949)Beauty and the BeastThe Lost World (1925)Ingagi (1930)American Film Institute (June 17, 2008). "AFI Crowns Top 10 Films in 10 Classic Genres". http://www.comingsoon.net/news/movienews.php?id=46072. Retrieved February 20, 2010.[Author unknown] (April 19, 2007). "King Kong (1933)". Rotten Tomatoes. http://uk.rottentomatoes.com/m/1011615-king_kong/. Retrieved February 20, 2010.[Author unknown (2)]. "Empire State Building to Dim Lights in Remembrance of Actress Fay Wray". United Press International, Inc.. http://www.upi.com/topic/Fay_Wray/photos/pg-3/. Retrieved February 20, 2010.Bigelow, Joe (1933). "King Kong review". Variety. http://www.variety.com/review/VE1117792322. Retrieved February 20, 2010.Doherty, Thomas Patrick (1999). Pre-code Hollywood: sex, immorality, and insurrection in American cinema, 19301934. Columbia University Press. p.293. ISBN0-231-11094-4.Ebert, Roger (February 3, 2002). King Kong (1933). Chicago Sun Times. http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=%2F20020203%2FREVIEWS08%2F202030301%2F1023. Retrieved February 20, 2010.Erb, Cynthia Marie (2009). Tracking King Kong: a Hollywood icon in world culture. Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press. pp.545. ISBN978-0-8143-3430-0.Erish, Andrew (January 8, 2006). "Illegitimate Dad of King Kong". Los Angeles Times. http://pqasb.pqarchiver.com/latimes/access/959395991.html?dids=959395991:959395991&FMT=ABS&FMTS=ABS:FT&type=current&date=Jan+8%2C+2006&author=Andrew+Erish&pub=Los+Angeles+Times&edition=&startpage=E.6&desc=Movies. Retrieved February 20, 2010.Goldner, Orville and George E. Turner (1975). The Making of King Kong. Ballantine Books. ISBN[[Special:BookSources/0-498-01519-6|0-498-01519-6]].Hall, Mordaunt (March 3, 1933). King Kong. New York Times. http://movies2.nytimes.com/mem/movies/review.html?title1=&title2=KING%20KONG%20%28MOVIE%29&reviewer=Mordaunt%20Hall&pdate=&v_id=27391. Retrieved February 20, 2010.Haver, Ronald (1987). David O. Selznick's Hollywood. New York: Random House. ISBN978-0-517-47665-9."King Kong Collection". Amazon.com UK. http://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B000BA8EAW. Retrieved February 20, 2010.Maltin, Leonard, ed. (2007). Leonard Maltin's 2008 Movie Guide. New York: Signet. ISBN978-0-451-22186-5.Morton, Ray (2005). King Kong: the history of a movie icon from Fay Wray to Peter Jackson. New York, NY: Applause Theatre & Cinema Books. ISBN1-55783-669-8.Peary, Gerald (2004). "Missing Links: The Jungle Origins of King Kong". http://www.geraldpeary.com/essays/jkl/kingkong-1.html. Retrieved February 20, 2010.King Kong at the Internet Movie DatabaseKing Kong at AllRoviKing Kong at Box Office MojoKing Kong at Rotten TomatoesThe Birth of a Nation (originally called The Clansman) is a 1915 silent drama film directed by D. W. Griffith and based on the novel and play The Clansman, both by Thomas Dixon, Jr. Griffith co-wrote the screenplay (with Frank E. Woods), and co-produced the film (with Harry Aitken). It was released on February 8, 1915. The film was originally presented in two parts, separated by an intermission.The film chronicles the relationship of two families in Civil War and Reconstruction-era America: the pro-Union Northern Stonemans and the pro-Confederacy Southern Camerons over the course of several years. The assassination of President Abraham Lincoln by John Wilkes Booth is dramatized.The film was a commercial success, but was highly controversial owing to its portrayal of African American men (played by white actors in blackface) as unintelligent and sexually aggressive towards white women, and the portrayal of the Ku Klux Klan (whose original founding is dramatized) as a heroic force.[3][4] There were widespread protests[5] against The Birth of a Nation, and it was banned in several cities. The outcry of racism was so great that Griffith was inspired to produce Intolerance the following year.[6]The movie is also credited as one of the events that inspired the formation of the "second era" Ku Klux Klan at Stone Mountain, Georgia in the same year. The Birth of a Nation was used as a recruiting tool for the KKK.[7] It was the first motion picture to be shown at the White House.[8] President Woodrow Wilson supposedly said the film was "like writing history with lightning. And my only regret is that it is all so terribly true." The attribution is disputed.The film follows two juxtaposed families: the Northern Stonemans, consisting of the abolitionist Congressman Austin Stoneman (based on the Reconstruction-era Congressman Thaddeus Stevens[citation needed]), his two sons, and his daughter Elsie; and the Southern Camerons, a family including two daughters, Margaret and Flora, and three sons, most notably Ben.The Stoneman brothers visit the Camerons at their South Carolina estate, representing the Old South. The elder of the two Stoneman sons falls in love with Margaret Cameron, while Ben Cameron idolizes a picture of Elsie Stoneman. When the Civil War begins, all the young men join their respective armies.A black militia (with a white leader) ransacks the Cameron house. The Cameron women are rescued when Confederate soldiers rout the militia. Meanwhile, the younger Stoneman and two of the Cameron brothers are killed in the war. Ben Cameron is wounded after a heroic charge at the Siege of Petersburg, in which he gains the nickname "the Little Colonel". He is taken to a Northern hospital where he meets Elsie Stoneman, who is working there as a nurse. While recovering, Cameron is told that he will be hanged for being a guerrilla. Elsie takes Cameron's mother, who has traveled to Washington to tend her son, to see Abraham Lincoln. Mrs. Cameron persuades Lincoln to issue a pardon.When Lincoln is assassinated at Ford's Theater, his conciliatory postwar policy expires with him. Austin Stoneman and other radical congressmen are determined to punish the South, using harsh measures that Griffith depicts as typical of the Reconstruction era.[9]Stoneman and his mulatto protg, Silas Lynch, go to South Carolina in 1871 to observe the situation first hand. Black soldiers parade through the streets. During the election, whites are turned away while blacks stuff the ballot boxes. Lynch is elected Lieutenant Governor. The newly-elected mostly-black legislature is shown at their desks, with one member taking off his shoe and putting his feet up, and others drinking liquor and feasting. They pass laws requiring white civilians to salute black officers and allowing mixed-race marriages.Meanwhile, inspired by observing white children pretending to be ghosts to scare off black children, Ben fights back by forming the Ku Klux Klan. As a result, Elsie breaks off their relationship out of loyalty to her father. Gus, a freedman and soldier who is now a Captain, follows Flora Cameron as she goes alone to fetch water. He tells her he is looking to get married. Frightened, she flees into the forest, pursued by Gus. Trapped on a precipice, Flora warns Gus she will jump if he comes any closer. When he does, she leaps to her death. Ben finds his sister, having run through the Forest looking for her and seen her jump, and holds her as she lies dying. The Klan hunts Gus down, tries him, and finds him guilty. The clansmen leave his corpse on Lynch's doorstep.Lynch orders a crackdown on the Klan. Dr. Cameron, Ben's father, is arrested for having Ben's Klan costume, a crime punishable by death. Ben and their faithful servants rescue him, and the Camerons flee. When their wagon breaks down, they make their way to a small hut, home to two former Union soldiers, who agree to hide them. As an intertitle states, "The former enemies of North and South are united again in defense of their Aryan birthright."Austin Stoneman leaves to avoid being connected with Lynch's crackdown. Elsie, learning of Dr. Cameron's arrest, goes to Lynch to plead for his release. Lynch tries to force Elsie to marry him and she finally faints. Stoneman returns, causing Elsie to be placed in another room, and is happy at first when Lynch tells him he wants to marry a white woman, but is angered when Lynch tells him which one. Disguised Klansmen spies discover Elsie's plight when she breaks a window and cries for help and leave to get help. She falls unconscious again, and revives gagged and being bound. The Klan, gathered together at full strength and with Ben leading them, rides in to regain control of the town. When news reaches Ben about Elsie, he and others go to her rescue. Elsie frees her mouth and screams for help. Lynch is captured. Victorious, the clansmen celebrate in the streets. Meanwhile, Lynch's militia surrounds and attacks the hut where the Camerons are hiding. The clansmen, with Ben at their head, race to save them just in time.The next election day, blacks find a line of mounted and armed Klansmen just outside their homes, and are intimidated into not voting. The film concludes with a double honeymoon of Phil Stoneman with Margaret Cameron and Ben Cameron with Elsie Stoneman. The masses are shown oppressed by a giant warlike figure who gradually fades away. The scene shifts to another group finding peace under the image of Christ. The penultimate title rhetorically asks: "Dare we dream of a golden day when the bestial War shall rule no more? But instead-the gentle Prince in the Hall of Brotherly Love in the City of Peace."Uncredited:The Birth of a Nation began filming in 1914 and pioneered such camera techniques as the use of panoramic long shots, the iris effects, still-shots, night photography, panning camera shots, and a carefully staged battle sequence with hundreds of extras made to look like thousands. It also contains many new artistic techniques, such as color tinting for dramatic purposes, building up the plot to an exciting climax, dramatizing history alongside fiction, and featuring its own musical score written for an orchestra.[citation needed]When the film was released, it shattered both box office and film-length records, running three hours and ten minutes. Its power continues to be recognized. In 1998, it was voted one of the "Top 100 American Films" (#44) by the American Film Institute.The film was based on Thomas Dixon, Jr.'s novels The Clansman and The Leopard's Spots. It was originally to have been shot in Kinemacolor but D. W. Griffith took over the Hollywood studio of Kimemacolor and Kinemacolor's plans to film Dixon's novel. Griffith, whose father served as a colonel in the Confederate Army, agreed to pay Thomas Dixon $10,000 (equal to $232,027 today) for the rights to his play The Clansman. Since he ran out of money and could afford only $2,500 of the original option, Griffith offered Dixon 25 percent interest in the picture. Dixon reluctantly agreed, and the unprecedented success of the film made him rich. Dixon's proceeds were the largest sum any author had received for a motion picture story and amounted to several million dollars.[citation needed]Griffith's budget started at US$40,000 (equal to $928,106 today), but the film finally cost $112,000[10] (the equivalent of $2.41 million in 2010).[11] As a result, Griffith had to seek new sources of capital for his film. A ticket to the film cost a record $2 (equal to $45.95 today).[11]West Point engineers provided technical advice on the Civil War battle scenes. They provided Griffith with the artillery used in the film.[12]The film premiered on February 8, 1915, at Clune's Auditorium in downtown Los Angeles. At its premiere the film was entitled The Clansman, but the title was later changed to The Birth of a Nation to reflect Griffith's belief that the United States emerged out of the American Civil War and Reconstruction as a unified nation.[13]The film is in the public domain.[14]The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), founded in 1909, protested premieres of the film in numerous cities. It also conducted a public education campaign, publishing articles protesting the film's fabrications and inaccuracies, organizing petitions against it, and conducting education on the facts of the war and Reconstruction.[15]When the film was shown, riots broke out in Boston, Philadelphia and other major cities. The cities of Chicago; Denver; Kansas City, Missouri; Minneapolis; Pittsburgh; and St. Louis, Missouri, refused to allow the film to open. The film's inflammatory character was a catalyst for gangs of whites to attack blacks. In Lafayette, Indiana, after seeing the film, a white man murdered a black teenager.[16]Thomas Dixon, Jr., author of the source play The Clansman, was a former classmate of Woodrow Wilson at Johns Hopkins University. Dixon arranged a screening at the White House, for then-President Wilson, members of his cabinet, and their families. Wilson was reported to have said about the film, "It is like writing history with lightning. And my only regret is that it is all so terribly true". In Wilson: The New Freedom, the historian Arthur Link quotes Wilson's aide, Joseph Tumulty, who denied Wilson said this and also claims that "the President was entirely unaware of the nature of the play before it was presented and at no time has expressed his approbation of it."[17] Historians believe the quote attributed to Wilson originated with Dixon, who was relentless in publicizing the film. It has been repeated so often in print that it has taken on a life of its own. Dixon went so far as to promote the film as "Federally endorsed". After controversy over the film had grown, Wilson wrote that he disapproved of the "unfortunate production."[18]Griffith responded to the film's negative critical reception with his next film, Intolerance.Soon after World War I, in 1918, Emmett J. Scott helped produce and John W. Noble directed The Birth of a Race, hoping to capitalize on the success of Griffith's film by presenting a film set during the war. It featured a German-American family divided by the war, with sons fighting on either side, and the one loyal to the United States surviving to be part of the victory.[19]In 1919, the director/producer/writer Oscar Micheaux released Within Our Gates, a response from the African-American community. Notably, he reversed a key scene of Griffith's film by depicting a white man assaulting a black woman.The film was remixed as Rebirth of a Nation, a "live" cinema experience by DJ Spooky at Lincoln Center, and has toured at many venues around the world including The Acropolis as a live cinema "remix". The remix version was also presented at Paula Cooper Gallery in New York[20]The film is controversial due to its interpretation of history. University of Houston historian Steven Mintz summarizes its message as follows: Reconstruction was a disaster, blacks could never be integrated into white society as equals, and the violent actions of the Ku Klux Klan were justified to reestablish honest government.[21] The film suggested that the Ku Klux Klan restored order to the post-war South, which was depicted as endangered by abolitionists, freedmen, and carpetbagging Republican politicians from the North. This reflects the so-called Dunning School of historiography. [22] Bizarrely, the film also portrays beloved President Abraham Lincoln as friend of the Confederacy and hero to the racist White South. He is referred to as "the Great Heart."Some historians, such as E. Merton Coulter in his The South Under Reconstruction (1947), maintained the Dunning School view after World War II. Today, the Dunning School position is largely seen as a product of anti-black racism of the early 20th century, by which many Americans held that black Americans were unequal as citizens.Veteran film reviewer Roger Ebert wrote,Despite some similarities between the Congressman Stoneman character and Rep. Thaddeus Stevens of Pennsylvania, Rep. Stevens did not have the family members described and did not move to South Carolina during Reconstruction. He died in Washington, DC in 1868. However, Stevens was widely rumored to keep a biracial mistress-housekeeper, who was generously provided for in his will.[24]The depictions of mass Klan paramilitary actions do not seem to have historical equivalents, although there were incidents in 1871 where Klan groups traveled from other areas in fairly large numbers to aid localities in disarming local companies of the all-black portion of the state militia under various justifications prior to the eventual Federal troop intervention and the organized Klan's continued activities as small groups of "night riders".[25]The civil rights movement and other social movements created a new generation of historians, such as scholar Eric Foner, who led a reassessment of Reconstruction. Building on Du Bois' work but also adding new sources, they focused on achievements of the African American and white Republican coalitions, such as establishment of universal public education and charitable institutions in the South and extension of suffrage to black men. In response, the Southern-dominated Democratic Party and its affiliated white militias used extensive terrorism, intimidation and outright assassinations to suppress African-American leaders and voting in the 1870s and to regain power.[26]Released in 1915, The Birth of a Nation has been credited as groundbreaking among its contemporaries for its innovative application of the medium of film. The content of the work, however, has received widespread criticism for its blatantly racist and fantastical depictions of scenes that are presented onscreen as if in documentary form. Film critic Roger Ebert writes, "Certainly The Birth of a Nation (1915) presents a challenge for modern audiences. Unaccustomed to silent films and uninterested in film history, they find it quaint and not to their taste. Those evolved enough to understand what they are looking at find the early and wartime scenes brilliant, but cringe during the postwar and Reconstruction scenes, which are racist in the ham-handed way of an old minstrel show or a vile comic pamphlet."[27]The film earned $10 million in its initial release, and over the next 35 years increased its total to $50 million,[2] holding the mantle of the highest grossing film until it was overtaken by Gone with the Wind.[28]In 1992, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry. Despite its controversial story, the film has been praised by film critics such as Roger Ebert, who said: "The Birth of a Nation is not a bad film because it argues for evil. Like Riefenstahls Triumph of the Will, it is a great film that argues for evil. To understand how it does so is to learn a great deal about film, and even something about evil."[27] The website Rotten Tomatoes, which compiles reviews from various sources, indicates the film has a 100% "fresh" (positive) rating.[29]According to a 2002 article in the Los Angeles Times, the film facilitated the refounding of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s.[30] As late as the 1970s, the Ku Klux Klan continued to use the film as a recruitment tool.American Film Institute recognitionA sequel called The Fall of a Nation was released in 1916. The film was directed by Thomas Dixon, Jr., who adapted it from his own novel The Fall of a Nation. The film has three acts and a prologue.[31] Despite its success in the foreign market, the film was not a success among the American audiences.[32] It is believed that it is now a lost film.One famous part of the film was added by Griffith only on the second run of the film[33] and is missing from most online versions of the film (presumably taken from first run prints.)[34]
These are the second and third of three opening title cards which defend the film. The added titles read:A PLEA FOR THE ART OF THE MOTION PICTURE: We do not fear censorship, for we have no wish to offend with improprieties or obscenities, but we do demand, as a right, the liberty to show the dark side of wrong, that we may illuminate the bright side of virtue  the same liberty that is conceded to the art of the written word  that art to which we owe the Bible and the works of ShakespeareandIf in this work we have conveyed to the mind the ravages of war to the end that war may be held in abhorrence, this effort will not have been in vain.Various film historians have expressed a range of views about these titles. To Nicholas Andrew Miller, this shows that "Griffith's greatest achievement in The Birth of Nation was that he brought the cinema's capacity for spectacle...under the rein of an outdated by comfortably literary form of historical narrative. Griffith's models...are not the pioneers of film spectacle...but the giants of literary narrative."[35] On the other hand, S. Kittrell Rushing complains about Griffith's "didactic" title-cards,[36] while Stanley Corkin complains that Griffith "masks his idea of fact in the rhetoric of high art and free expression" and creates film which "erodes the very ideal" of "liberty" which he asserts.[37]Image EntertainmentKino VideoKino Video DISC 1 - Blu-ray DISC 2 - DVD DISC 3 - DVDFebruary 8, 1915(1915-02-08)1 Plot

1.1 Part 1: Pre-Civil War America
1.2 Part 2: Reconstruction

1.1 Part 1: Pre-Civil War America1.2 Part 2: Reconstruction2 Cast3 Production4 Responses5 Ideology and accuracy6 Significance7 Sequel8 New opening titles on re-release9 DVD releases10 Blu-ray release11 References12 External links1.1 Part 1: Pre-Civil War America1.2 Part 2: ReconstructionLillian Gish as Elsie StonemanMae Marsh as Flora CameronHenry B. Walthall as Colonel Ben CameronMiriam Cooper as Margaret CameronWilliam P. DeVaull as JakeRalph Lewis as Austin StonemanGeorge Siegmann as Silas LynchWalter Long as GusRobert Harron as Tod StonemanWallace Reid as Jeff the blacksmithJoseph Henabery as Abraham LincolnElmer Clifton as Phil StonemanJosephine Crowell as Mrs. CameronSpottiswoode Aitken as Dr. CameronGeorge Beranger as Wade CameronMaxfield Stanley as Duke CameronJennie Lee as MammyDonald Crisp as General Ulysses S. GrantHoward Gaye as General Robert E. LeeMary Alden as Lydia BrownMonte BlueBobby Burns as Klan LeaderDavid Butler as Union soldier / Confederate soldierPeggy Cartwright as Young girlJohn Ford as KlansmanGibson GowlandSam De Grasse as Senator Charles SumnerOlga Grey as Laura KeeneRussell HicksElmo Lincoln as BlacksmithEugene Pallette as Union soldierVester PeggAlma RubensCharles Stevens as VolunteerMadame Sul-Te-Wan as Black womanRaoul Walsh as John Wilkes BoothJules WhiteViolet Wilkey as young FloraTom Wilson as Stoneman's servantMary WynnW.B. Freeman as Union prison camp sentryAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies No. 44Released: November 17, 1998Aspect Ratio: 1.33:1Sound: English (Silent) (Dolby Digital 2.0 Stereo)Region 0Edition details:24-minute making-of documentary detailing the production of the movie with rare behind-the-scenes footageReleased: August 14, 2002Aspect Ratio: 1.33:1Sound: English (Silent) (Dolby Digital 2.0 Stereo)Region 0Edition details:

Civil War shorts directed by D.W. Griffith:

In the Border States (1910, 16 min.)
The House With Closed Shutters (1910, 17 min.)
The Fugitive (1910, 17 min.)
His Trust (1910, 14 min.)
His Trust Fulfilled (1910, 11 min.)
Swords and Hearts (1911, 16 min.)
The Battle (1911, 17 min.)


"The Making of The Birth of a Nation" (1992);
Filmed prologue to The Birth of a Nation (1930);
New York vs. The Birth of a Nation: an archive of information documenting the battles over

Civil War shorts directed by D.W. Griffith:

In the Border States (1910, 16 min.)
The House With Closed Shutters (1910, 17 min.)
The Fugitive (1910, 17 min.)
His Trust (1910, 14 min.)
His Trust Fulfilled (1910, 11 min.)
Swords and Hearts (1911, 16 min.)
The Battle (1911, 17 min.)

In the Border States (1910, 16 min.)The House With Closed Shutters (1910, 17 min.)The Fugitive (1910, 17 min.)His Trust (1910, 14 min.)His Trust Fulfilled (1910, 11 min.)Swords and Hearts (1911, 16 min.)The Battle (1911, 17 min.)"The Making of The Birth of a Nation" (1992);Filmed prologue to The Birth of a Nation (1930);New York vs. The Birth of a Nation: an archive of information documenting the battles overthe film's 1922 re-release

Excerpts from 1915 souvenir book and several original program

Excerpts from 1915 souvenir book and several original programNote: "Griffith Masterworks" editionCivil War shorts directed by D.W. Griffith:

In the Border States (1910, 16 min.)
The House With Closed Shutters (1910, 17 min.)
The Fugitive (1910, 17 min.)
His Trust (1910, 14 min.)
His Trust Fulfilled (1910, 11 min.)
Swords and Hearts (1911, 16 min.)
The Battle (1911, 17 min.)

In the Border States (1910, 16 min.)The House With Closed Shutters (1910, 17 min.)The Fugitive (1910, 17 min.)His Trust (1910, 14 min.)His Trust Fulfilled (1910, 11 min.)Swords and Hearts (1911, 16 min.)The Battle (1911, 17 min.)"The Making of The Birth of a Nation" (1992);Filmed prologue to The Birth of a Nation (1930);New York vs. The Birth of a Nation: an archive of information documenting the battles overIn the Border States (1910, 16 min.)The House With Closed Shutters (1910, 17 min.)The Fugitive (1910, 17 min.)His Trust (1910, 14 min.)His Trust Fulfilled (1910, 11 min.)Swords and Hearts (1911, 16 min.)The Battle (1911, 17 min.)Excerpts from 1915 souvenir book and several original programReleased: November 22, 2011Aspect Ratio: 1.33:1Sound: DTS-HD Master Audio English, Dolby 2.0 StereoRegion FreeEdition details:Note: Extras are identical to "Griffith Masterworks" DVDAddams, Jane, in Crisis: A Record of Darker Races, X (May 1915), 19, 41, and (June 1915), 88.Bogle, Donald. Toms, Coons, Mulattoes, Mammies and Bucks: An Interpretive History of Blacks in American Films (1973).Brodie, Fawn M. Thaddeus Stevens, Scourge of the South (New York, 1959) p.8693. Corrects the historical record as to Dixon's false representation of Stevens in this film with regard to his racial views and relations with his housekeeper.Chalmers, David M. Hooded Americanism: The History of the Ku Klux Klan (New York: 1965) p.30 *Cook, Raymond Allen. Fire from the Flint: The Amazing Careers of Thomas Dixon (Winston-Salem, N.C., 1968).Franklin, John Hope. "Silent Cinema as Historical Mythmaker". In Myth America: A Historical Anthology, Volume II. 1997. Gerster, Patrick, and Cords, Nicholas. (editors.) Brandywine Press, St. James, NY. ISBN 978-1-881089-97-1Franklin, John Hope, "Propaganda as History" pp.1023 in Race and History: Selected Essays 19381988 (Louisiana State University Press: 1989); first published in The Massachusetts Review 1979. Describes the history of the novel, The Clan and this film.Franklin, John Hope, Reconstruction After the Civil War, (Chicago, 1961) p.57Hodapp, Christopher L., VonKannon, Alice, Conspiracy Theories & Secret Societies For Dummies, (Hoboken: Wiley, 2008) p.2356Korngold, Ralph, Thaddeus Stevens. A Being Darkly Wise and Rudely Great (New York: 1955) pp.7276. corrects Dixon's false characterization of Stevens' racial views and of his dealings with his housekeeper.Leab, Daniel J., From Sambo to Superspade, (Boston, 1975) p.2339New York Times, roundup of reviews of this film, March 7, 1915.The New Republica, II (March 20, 1915), 185Poole, W. Scott, Monsters in America: Our Historical Obsession with the Hideous and the Haunting, (Waco, Texas: Baylor, 2011), 30. ISBN 978-1-60258-314-6Simkins, Francis B., "New Viewpoints of Southern Reconstruction," Journal of Southern History, V (February, 1939), pp.4961.Stokes, Melvyn, D. W. Griffith's The Birth of a Nation: A History of "The Most Controversial Motion Picture of All Time" (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007). The latest study of the film's making and subsequent career.Williamson, Joel, After Slavery: The Negro in South Carolina During Reconstruction (Chapel Hill, 1965). This book corrects Dixon's false reporting of Reconstruction, as shown in his novel, his play and this film.The Birth of a Nation at the Internet Movie DatabaseBirth of a Nation on YouTubeThe Birth of a Nation is available for free download at the Internet Archive [more]The Birth of a Nation at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Birth of a Nation at AllRoviThe Birth of a Nation at Rotten TomatoesGMU.edu, "Art (and History) by Lightning Flash": The Birth of a Nation and Black ProtestThe Birth of a Nation on Roger Ebert's list of great moviesThe Birth of a Nation on filmsite.org, a web site offering comprehensive summaries of classic filmsThe Myth of a Nation by Greg Ferrara, challenging some of the "firsts" listed by film historiansSouvenir Guide for The Birth of a Nation, hosted by the Portal to Texas HistoryVirtual-History.com, LiteratureW. Scott Poole, Monsters in America: Our Historical Obsession with the Hideous and the Haunting (Waco, Texas: Baylor, 2011), 30, 87, 100101.A Streetcar Named Desire is the 1951 film adaptation of the 1947, Pulitzer Prize winning stage play by Tennessee Williams. Williams collaborated with Oscar Saul on the screenplay and Elia Kazan who directed the stage production went on to direct the film. Marlon Brando, Kim Hunter, and Karl Malden, all members of the original Broadway cast, reprised their roles for the film. Vivien Leigh, who had appeared in the London theatre production, was brought in for the film version in lieu of Jessica Tandy, who had created the part of Blanche DuBois on Broadway.A Streetcar Named Desire holds the distinction of garnering Academy Award wins for actors in three out of the four acting categories. Oscars were won by Vivien Leigh, Best Actress, Karl Malden, Best Supporting Actor, and Kim Hunter, Best Supporting Actress. Marlon Brando was nominated for his performance as Stanley Kowalski, and although lauded for his powerful portrayal, did not win the Oscar for Best Actor.The film is also noteworthy for being the first film to honor actors in both the Best Supporting Actor and Best Supporting Actress category.Blanche DuBois is a faded Southern belle, who dismissed from her teaching job in Auriol, Mississippi, and disgraced in her hometown is broken and bereft. She seeks solace and refuge with her married sister Stella and her husband Stanley Kowalski who are living in New Orleans.She arrives in the steamy city and is disconcerted to discover Stella living in a raucous, French Quarter neighborhood in a rundown, dismal building. Blanches resolve to impress withers against the overpowering presence and animal swagger of Stanley Kowalski, a blue-collar worker, a man of no inhibitions and boisterous manner. Blanche is grieved to realize that Stella has repudiated their shared lineage, the values of the old Southern aristocracy, and chosen a life of base existence with a crude man.The initial reunion with her sister Stella is fraught with recriminations, Blanche bitter over what she perceives as her sisters desertion of family duty resulting in the ultimate loss of the ancestral home, Belle Reve. The tension between all three mounts and becomes more dramatic as Blanche strives to maintain her pretenses of old Southern gentility and coquettishness, engage Stanleys sympathies, and accommodate herself to the palpable sexual current, which is the keynote of her sisters marriage. Hope arrives for Blanche with the attentions of Stanleys co-worker and old army buddy, Mitch. Both respond to the loneliness they sense in each other and are drawn together.As the months pass, Stanleys limited tolerance of Blanches intrusion into their home is worn thin. He sees his sister-in-law as an influence threatening to undermine his marriage. He perceives Blanche working on his wife with a mission to rekindle in her sister the memories of their heritage, the superiority of the cultural refinement and social graces of the old South.All the while, Stanley becomes more determined to bring to light Blanches discredited past, expose her delicate sensibilities as a pose, and her modesty a faade.Tennessee Williams plotted out a narrative of powerful allegory. The story line unfolds as the drama of life primed by two divergent forces on an unavoidable collision course. It is the dreamscape world of culture and refinement represented by Blanche DuBois in conflict with harsh, unadorned reality epitomized by the character of Stanley Kowlaski.Blanche DuBois (Vivien Leigh) is a fading, but nevertheless attractive Southern belle, whose pretensions to virtue and culture only thinly mask her alcoholism and delusions of grandeur. Her poise is an illusion she presents to shield others, and most of all herself, from reality to try to make herself still attractive to new male suitors. Blanche arrives from her hometown of Auriol, Mississippi at the apartment of her sister, Stella Kowalski (Kim Hunter), in the French Quarter of New Orleans, on Elysian Fields Avenue. The local transportation that she takes to arrive there includes a streetcar route named "Desire." The steamy, urban ambiance is a shock to Blanche's nerves.Explaining that her ancestral southern plantation, Belle Reve in Auriol, Mississippi, has been "lost" due to the "epic fornications" of her ancestors, Blanche is welcomed with some trepidation by Stella, who fears the reaction of her husband, Stanley Kowalski (Marlon Brando). Blanche says her supervisor gave her time off her job as an English teacher because of her upset nerves. In truth, however, she was fired for having an affair with a 17-year-old male student. This turns out not to be the only seduction she had engaged in  and these problems led Blanche to run away from Auriol. A brief marriage scarred by the suicide of her spouse, Allan Grey, has led Blanche to live in a world in which her fantasies and illusions are seamlessly mixed with her reality.In contrast to both the self-effacing and deferential Stella and the pretentious refinement of Blanche, Stanley is a force of nature: primal, rough-hewn, brutish and sensual. He dominates Stella in every way and is physically and emotionally abusive. Stella tolerates his behavior as this is part of what attracted her in the first place. Their love and relationship is heavily based on powerful, even animalistic, sexual chemistry - something that Blanche says that she finds impossible to understand, despite long glances of admiration and lust towards Stanley. The arrival of Blanche upsets her sister's and brother-in-law's system of mutual dependence. Stella's concern for her sister's well-being emboldens Blanche to hold court in the Kowalski apartment, infuriating Stanley and leading to conflict in his relationship with his wife. Stanley's friend and Blanche's would-be suitor, Harold "Mitch" Mitchell (Karl Malden), is trampled as Blanche and Stanley head for a collision course. Stanley discovers Blanche's past through a co-worker who travels to Auriol frequently. He confronts Blanche with the things she has been trying to put behind her, partly out of concern that her character flaws may be damaging to the lives of those in her new home (just as they were in Auriol), and partly due to resentment of her airs of superiority toward him and a distaste for pretense in general. However, his attempts to "unmask" her are predictably cruel and violent.Their final confrontation  a rape  results in Blanche's nervous breakdown. Stanley has her committed to a mental institution. Mitch, knowing that Stanley raped Blanche and had her committed to a mental institution, lashes out and punches Stanley but is then held back by the other men, and he starts to weep. As the other men stare at Stanley, he claims he "never once touched her".Devastated with her sister's fate, Stella weeps and rejects Stanley's intention to comfort her and pushes him away. Stella runs out to see Blanche off, but is too late, as the car Blanche left in has already gone. As he cries her name once more ("Stella! Hey, Stella!"), Stella clings to her child and vows that she is "never going back" to Stanley again. She goes upstairs once more in order to seek refuge with her neighbor, Eunice (Peg Hillias), as Stanley continues to call her name.Much of the original Broadway cast, Marlon Brando, Kim Hunter, Karl Malden, Rudy Bond, Nick Dennis and Richard Garrick repeated their roles for the film.Many big names were considered for the role of Blanche, including Olivia de Havilland and Bette Davis.John Garfield turned down the lead role of Stanley as he did not want to be overshadowed by the lead actress playing Blanche.Jessica Tandy, who had originated Blanche DuBois on Broadway, was originally slated to play the role but was bypassed as not being well known enough. Vivien Leigh was cast, star of the London production, at the insistence of the producers. This was because her fame, from films such as Gone with the Wind in which she had also played a Southern belle, provided the star power which they felt the film needed; Brando had originated the role of Stanley on Broadway but had not yet achieved the fame necessary to draw audiences, which is why in trailers and during the credits of the film he is credited after Vivien Leigh.[1]Most of the filming was on studio sets in Hollywood, over the course of 36 days, but a few exteriors were filmed in New Orleans, most notably the opening scenes of Blanche's arrival. By the time the film was in production however, the Desire streetcar named in the play had been converted into a bus service and the production team had to gain permission from the authorities to hire out a streetcar with the "Desire" name on it. The streetcar visible in the film, Perley Thomas #922, was restored in 1998,[2] and is still in service in New Orleans.[3]Vivien Leigh was viewed as an outsider by some of the cast, who already had met during the Broadway production, and Kazan told her to exploit her isolation in the role to reflect Blanche's.Leigh was later diagnosed with bipolar disorder and was said towards the end of her life to have mistaken herself for Blanche at many times.During studio shooting, Elia Kazan made the set walls movable so that, with each passing scene, the walls could close in on Blanche Dubois (thus mirroring her insanity).[citation needed]Brando's iconic tight T-shirt had to be made specially, as one could not buy fitted T-shirts at the time; a regular T-shirt was bought, washed several times and its back was sewn in order to tighten it for Brando.[citation needed]The music score, by Alex North, was a radical departure from the major trend in Hollywood at that time, which was action-based and overly manipulative. Instead of composing in the traditional leitmotif style, North wrote short sets of music that reflected the psychological dynamics of the characters. For his work on the film, North was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Music Score, one of two nominations in that category that year. He also was nominated for his music score for the film version of another play, Death of a Salesman, which also was composed with his unique technique. However, he lost to Franz Waxman's score for A Place in the Sun.The play's themes were controversial, causing the screenplay for the film to be watered down to comply with the Hollywood Production Code. In the film, Stella denounces Stanley's rape of Blanche, perhaps to the point of leaving the household. In the original play, the ending is more ambiguous, with Stella, distraught at having sent off her sister Blanche, mutely allowing herself to be consoled by Stanley. Williams, in his memoirs, describes the film as "marvelous performances in a great movie, only slightly marred by Hollywood ending".[4]In the original play, Blanche's deceased husband, Allan Grey, had committed suicide after he was discovered having a homosexual affair. This material was removed for the film; Blanche says only that she showed scorn towards Allan, driving him to suicide.Some of these changes were in the screenplay. Other scenes were present but cut after filming was complete in order to conform to the Production Code and later, to avoid condemnation by the National Legion of Decency. According to the DVD's audio commentary, these cuts suggested by the Legion of Decency were made without the knowledge of the director.While the film was originally distributed by Warner Brothers, it was mainly a production of Charles K. Feldman's company. Feldman (and eventually his estate) would gain all ancillary rights through 1993. Through the decades, the film was re-released and outsourced through different studios, first by 20th Century Fox for a 1958 re-issue, and in 1970 through United Artists. UA would ultimately hold television syndication and home video rights (through what was then CBS/Fox Video) until 1992 when the Feldman estate sold their share of the film to the Motion Picture and Television Fund.Years later, the negatives, including the censored footage, wound up in the archives of Lorimar-Telepictures. Warner Bros. rediscovered said footage during a routine inventory of the Lorimar archives after Warners purchased the latter company. It was through this discovery that a reconstruction of the film restoring Kazan's original vision was sanctioned.[5] Editors used Kazan's autobiography A Life and Rudy Behlmer's Inside Warner Bros. - both of which went into great detail about the censored material - as a reference. Kazan himself was not involved with this version.[6]The current cut has the following restored scenes:The film earned an estimated $4,250,000 at the US and Canadian box office in 1951, making it the fifth biggest hit of the year.[7]The film drew very high praise from critics upon release. The New York Times critic Bosley Crowther praised the film, stating that "inner torments are seldom projected with such sensitivity and clarity on the screen" and commending both Vivien Leigh's and Marlon Brando's performances. Film critic Roger Ebert also expressed praise for the film, calling it a "great ensemble of the movies." The film currently has a very high 98% rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 50 reviews.[8]A Streetcar Named Desire won four awards at the 24th Academy Awards.[9] The film set an Oscar record when it became the first film to win in three acting categories (this achievement was later equalled by Network in 1976). The awards it won were for Actress in a Leading Role (Leigh), Actor in a Supporting Role (Malden), Actress in a Supporting Role (Hunter), and Art Direction.[10]In 1999, A Streetcar Named Desire was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".American Film Institute recognitionBest Actress and Best Supporting ActressSeptember 18, 1951(1951-09-18)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Casting
3.2 Locations and design
3.3 Music

3.1 Casting3.2 Locations and design3.3 Music4 Releases

4.1 Restoration

4.1 Restoration5 Reception

5.1 Critical response
5.2 Accolades

5.1 Critical response5.2 Accolades6 References7 External links3.1 Casting3.2 Locations and design3.3 Music4.1 Restoration5.1 Critical response5.2 AccoladesVivien Leigh as Blanche DuBoisMarlon Brando as Stanley KowalskiKim Hunter as Stella KowalskiKarl Malden as Harold "Mitch" MitchellRudy Bond as Steve HubbelNick Dennis as Pablo GonzalesPeg Hillias as Eunice HubbelWright King as A CollectorRichard Garrick as A DoctorStella says "Stanley's always smashed things. Why, on our wedding night, as soon as we came in here, he snatched off one of my slippers and rushed about the place smashing the light bulbs with it...I was sort of thrilled by it."The dialogue makes it clearer that Blanche's husband was homosexual and that she made him commit suicide with her insults.Blanche's line explaining that she wants to kiss the paperboy "softly and sweetly" now has the words "...on your mouth" at the end.When Stella takes refuge upstairs after Stanley punches her, her emotions are made clear as she is shown in close up.Stanley's line, "Maybe you wouldn't be so bad to interfere with", and the ensuing rape scene.1998 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #452002 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions #672005 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Stella! Hey, Stella!" #45
"I've always depended on the kindness of strangers," #75

"Stella! Hey, Stella!" #45"I've always depended on the kindness of strangers," #752005 AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores #192007 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #47"Stella! Hey, Stella!" #45"I've always depended on the kindness of strangers," #75A Streetcar Named Desire at the Internet Movie DatabaseA Streetcar Named Desire at the TCM Movie DatabaseA Clockwork Orange is a 1971 film written, directed and produced by Stanley Kubrick, adapted from Anthony Burgess's 1962 novella A Clockwork Orange. It features disturbing, violent images, facilitating its social commentary on psychiatry, youth gangs, and other social, political, and economic subjects in a dystopian, future Britain.Alex (Malcolm McDowell), the main character, is a charismatic, sociopathic delinquent whose interests include classical music (especially Beethoven), rape, and what is termed "ultra-violence". He leads a small gang of thugs (Pete, Georgie, and Dim), whom he calls his droogs (from the Russian , "friend", "buddy"). The film chronicles the horrific crime spree of his gang, his capture, and attempted rehabilitation via controversial psychological conditioning. Alex narrates most of the film in Nadsat, a fractured adolescent slang comprising Slavic (especially Russian), English, and Cockney rhyming slang.A Clockwork Orange features a soundtrack comprising mostly classical music selections and Moog synthesizer compositions by Wendy Carlos (then known as "Walter Carlos"). The artwork of the now-iconic poster of A Clockwork Orange was created by Philip Castle with the layout by designer Bill Gold.In futuristic London, Alex (Malcolm McDowell) is the leader of his "droogs", Pete (Michael Tarn), Georgie (James Marcus), and Dim (Warren Clarke), one of many youth gangs in the decaying metropolis. One night, after intoxicating themselves on "milk plus", they engage in an evening of "ultra-violence", including beating an elderly vagrant (Paul Farrell), and fighting a rival gang led by Billyboy (Richard Connaught).[2] Stealing a car, they drive to the country home of writer F. Alexander (Patrick Magee), where they beat Mr. Alexander to the point of crippling him for life. Alex then rapes his wife (Adrienne Corri) while intoning "Singin' in the Rain".The next day, while truant from school, Alex is approached by probation officer Mr. P. R. Deltoid (Aubrey Morris), who is aware of Alex's violence and cautions him. In response, Alex visits a record store where he picks up two girls. Alex and the girls have sex in a fast-motion scene.After the events of the night before, his droogs express discontent with Alex's petty crimes, demanding more equality and more high-yield thefts. Alex reasserts his leadership by attacking them and throwing them into a canal. That night, Alex invades the mansion of a wealthy "cat"-woman (Miriam Karlin), filled with erotic art. While his droogs remain at the front door, Alex bludgeons the woman with a phallic statue. At the climax of the attack, close-ups of the erotic paintings on the walls are barely visible in single-frame sequences. Hearing police sirens, Alex tries to run away, but is betrayed by his droogs. Dim smashes a pint bottle of milk across his face, leaving him stunned and bleeding. Alex is captured and brutally beaten by the police. A gloating Deltoid spits in his face and informs him that the woman subsequently died in the hospital, making him a murderer. Alex is sentenced to 14 years incarceration.Two years into the sentence, the Minister of the Interior (Anthony Sharp) arrives at the prison looking for test subjects for the Ludovico technique, an experimental aversion therapy for rehabilitating criminals within two weeks; Alex readily volunteers. The process involves drugging the subject, strapping him to a chair, propping his eyelids open, and forcing him to watch violent movies. Alex, initially pleased by the violent images he sees, becomes nauseated due to the drugs. He realizes that one of the films' soundtracks is by his favourite composer, Ludwig van Beethoven, and that the Ludovico technique will make him sick when he hears the music he loves. He tries unsuccessfully to end the treatment.After two weeks of the Ludovico technique, the Minister of the Interior puts on a demonstration to prove that Alex is "cured". He is shown to be incapable of fighting back against an actor (John Clive) who insults and attacks him, and he becomes violently ill at the sight of a topless woman (Virginia Wetherell). Though the prison chaplain (Godfrey Quigley) protests at the results, saying that "there's no morality without choice", the prison governor (Michael Gover) asserts that they are not interested in the moral questions but only "the means to prevent violence".Alex is released and finds that his possessions have been confiscated by the police to help make restitution to his victims, and that his parents have rented out his room. Homeless, Alex encounters the same elderly vagrant from before, who attacks him with several other friends. Alex is saved by two policemen but is shocked to discover they are two of his former droogs, Dim and Georgie. They drag Alex to the countryside, where they beat and nearly drown him. The dazed Alex wanders the countryside before coming to the home of Mr Alexander, and collapses. Alex wakes up to find himself being treated by Mr Alexander and his manservant, Julian (David Prowse). Mr Alexander does not recognize Alex as his attacker but has read about his treatment in the newspapers. Seeing Alex as a political weapon to usurp the government, Mr Alexander intends to expose the Ludovico technique as a step toward totalitarianism by way of mind control. As Mr. Alexander prepares to introduce Alex to colleagues (John Savident and Margaret Tyzack), he hears Alex singing "Singin' in the Rain" in the bath, and the memories of the earlier assault return. With his colleagues' help, Mr. Alexander drugs Alex and places him in a locked upstairs bedroom, playing Beethoven's Ninth Symphony through the floor below. Alex, in excruciating pain, throws himself from the window and is knocked unconscious by the fall.Alex wakes up in a hospital, having dreamt about doctors messing around inside his head. While being given a series of psychological tests, Alex finds that he no longer has an aversion to violence. The Minister of the Interior arrives and apologizes to Alex, letting him know that Mr Alexander has been "put away". He offers to take care of Alex and get him a job in return for cooperation with his PR counter-offensive. As a sign of goodwill, the Minister brings in a stereo system playing Beethoven's Ninth Symphony. Alex then realizes that instead of an adverse reaction to the music, he sees an image of himself having sex in the snow with a woman in front of an approving crowd dressed in Beethoven-era fashion. He then states, in a sarcastic and menacing voice-over, "I was cured, all right!"The film's central moral question (as in many of Burgess' books) is the definition of "goodness" and whether it makes sense to use aversion therapy to stop immoral behaviour.[3] Stanley Kubrick, writing in Saturday Review, described the film as...a social satire dealing with the question of whether behavioural psychology and psychological conditioning are dangerous new weapons for a totalitarian government to use to impose vast controls on its citizens and turn them into little more than robots.[4]Similarly on the film production's call sheet (cited at greater length above), Kubrick wroteIt is a story of the dubious redemption of a teenage delinquent by condition-reflex therapy. It is at the same time a running lecture on free-will.After aversion therapy, Alex behaves like a good member of society, but not by choice. His goodness is involuntary; he has become the titular clockwork orange  organic on the outside, mechanical on the inside. In the prison, after witnessing the Technique in action on Alex, the chaplain criticises it as false, arguing that true goodness must come from within. This leads to the theme of abusing liberties  personal, governmental, civil  by Alex, with two conflicting political forces, the Government and the Dissidents, both manipulating Alex for their purely political ends.[5] The story critically portrays the "conservative" and "liberal" parties as equal, for using Alex as a means to their political ends: the writer Frank Alexander  a victim of Alex and gang  wants revenge against Alex and sees him as a means of definitively turning the populace against the incumbent government and its new regime. Mr Alexander fears the new government; in telephonic conversation, he says:. . . recruiting brutal young roughs into the police; proposing debilitating and will-sapping techniques of conditioning. Oh, we've seen it all before in other countries; the thin end of the wedge! Before we know where we are, we shall have the full apparatus of totalitarianism.On the other side, the Minister of the Interior (the Government) jails Mr Alexander (the Dissident Intellectual) on excuse of his endangering Alex (the People), rather than the government's totalitarian regime (described by Mr Alexander). It is unclear whether or not he has been harmed; however, the Minister tells Alex that the writer has been denied the ability to write and produce "subversive" material that is critical of the incumbent government and meant to provoke political unrest.It has been noted that Alex's immorality is reflected in the society in which he lives.[6] The Cat Lady's love of hardcore pornographic art is comparable to Alex's taste for sex and violence. Lighter forms of pornographic content adorn Alex's parents' home and, in a later scene, Alex awakens in hospital from his coma, interrupting a nurse and doctor engaged in a sexual act.Another critical target is the behaviourism (or "behavioural psychology") of the 1940s to 1960s as propounded by the psychologists John B. Watson and B. F. Skinner. Burgess disapproved of behaviourism, calling prominent behaviourist B. F. Skinner's most popular book, Beyond Freedom and Dignity (1971), "one of the most dangerous books ever written".[7] Although behaviourism's limitations were conceded by its principal founder, J. B. Watson, Skinner argued that behaviour modificationspecifically, operant conditioning (learned behaviours via systematic reward-and-punishment techniques) rather than the "classical" Watsonian conditioningis the key to an ideal society.[8] The film's Ludovico technique is widely perceived, however, as a parody of aversion therapy more than of classical or operant conditioning.[9]In showing the "rehabilitated" Alex repelled by both sex and violence, the film suggests that in depriving him of his ability to fend for himself, Alex's moral conditioning via the Ludovico technique dehumanises him, just as Alex's acts of violence in the first part of the film dehumanise his victims. The technique's attempt to condition Alex to associate violence with severe physical sickness is akin to the CIA's Project MKULTRA of the 1950s.The Ludovico technique has been compared to the existing technique of chemical castration.[10]During the filming of the Ludovico technique scene, McDowell scratched a cornea and was temporarily blinded. The doctor standing next to him in the scene, dropping saline solution into Alex's forced-open eyes, was a real physician present to prevent the actor's eyes from drying. McDowell also cracked some ribs filming the humiliation stage show.[11] A unique special effect technique was used when Alex jumps out of the window in an attempt to commit suicide and the viewer sees the ground approaching the camera until collision, i.e., as if from Alex's point of view. This effect was achieved by dropping a Newman Sinclair clockwork camera in a box, lens-first, from the third story of the Corus Hotel. To Kubrick's surprise, the camera survived six takes[citation needed].The cinematic adaptation of A Clockwork Orange (1962) was accidental. Screenplay writer Terry Southern gave Kubrick a copy of the novel, but, as he was developing a Napoleon Bonaparte-related project, Kubrick put it aside. Soon afterward, however, the Bonaparte project was cancelled and, sometime later, Kubrick happened upon the novel. It had an immediate impact. Of his enthusiasm for it, Kubrick said, "I was excited by everything about it, the plot, the ideas, the characters and of course the language... The story functions, of course, on several levels, political, sociological, philosophical and, what's most important, on a dreamlike psychological-symbolic level". Kubrick wrote a screenplay faithful to the novel, saying, "I think whatever Burgess had to say about the story was said in the book, but I did invent a few useful narrative ideas and reshape some of the scenes".[12] Kubrick based the script on the shortened US edition of the book, which missed the final chapter (restored in 1986).Anthony Burgess had mixed feelings about the cinema version of his novel, publicly saying he loved Malcolm McDowell and Michael Bates, and the use of music; he praised it as "brilliant", even so brilliant that it might be dangerous. Despite this enthusiasm, he was concerned that it lacked the novel's redemptive final chapter, an absence he blamed upon his American publisher (this chapter being omitted in all US editions of the novel prior to 1986) and not Kubrick.Burgess reports in his autobiography You've Had Your Time(1990) that he and Kubrick at first enjoyed a good relationship, each holding similar philosophical and political views and each very interested in literature, cinema, music and Napoleon Bonaparte. Burgess's 1974 novel Napoleon Symphony was dedicated to Kubrick. Their relationship soured, however, when Kubrick left Burgess to defend the film from accusations of glorifying violence. A (lapsed) Catholic, Burgess tried many times to explain the Christian moral points of the story to outraged Christian organizations and to defend it against newspaper accusations that it supported fascist dogma. He also went to receive awards given to Kubrick on his behalf.Burgess was deeply hurt, feeling that Kubrick had used him as a film publicity pawn. Malcolm McDowell, on publicity tour with Burgess, shared his feelings, and, at times, spoke harshly about Kubrick. As evidence, both novelist and actor cited Kubrick's uncontrolled ego manifest in the film credits: the only author credited is "Kubrick". Later, Burgess spoofed Kubrick's image, firstly in the musical version of A Clockwork Orange, where a Kubrick-like character is beaten; then in The Clockwork Testament(1974) novel, where the poet F.X. Enderby is attacked for "glorifying" violence in a film adaptation; and, in 1980, as the crafty director Sidney Labrick in the novel Earthly Powers.[citation needed]The first dramatization of A Clockwork Orange, featuring only the story's first three chapters, was made for the BBC programme Tonight, broadcast soon after the novel's original publication in 1962; no recording is known to exist. Six years before Stanley Kubrick's film, Andy Warhol made Vinyl, a low-budget version of the work.[citation needed] Reportedly, only two scenes are recognizable: "Victor" (Alex) wreaking havoc and undergoing the Ludovico technique. However, both Kubrick's and Warhol's films start with a similar shot, zooming back from Alex's face.[citation needed]Kubrick was a perfectionist of meticulous research, with thousands of photographs taken of potential locations, as well as many scene takes; however, per Malcolm McDowell, he usually "got it right" early on, so there were few takes. Filming took place between September 1970 and April 1971, making A Clockwork Orange the quickest film shoot in his career. Technically, to achieve and convey the fantastic, dream-like quality of the story, he filmed with extreme wide-angle lenses[13] such as the Kinoptik Tegea 9.8mm for 35mm Arriflex cameras,[14] and used fast- and slow motion to convey the mechanical nature of its bedroom sex scene or stylize the violence in a manner similar to Toshio Matsumoto's Funeral Parade of Roses (1969).[15]The society depicted in the film was perceived by some as Communist (as Michel Ciment pointed out in an interview with Kubrick) due to its slight ties to Russian culture. The teenage slang has a heavily Russian vocabulary, which can be attributed to Burgess. There is some evidence to suggest that the society is a socialist one, or perhaps a society moving out of a failed, Leftist socialism and into a Rightist, or fascist, society. In the novel, streets have paintings of working men in the style of Russian socialist art, and in the film, there is a mural of socialist artwork with obscenities drawn on it. As Malcolm McDowell points out on the DVD commentary, Alex's residence was shot on failed Labour Party architecture, and the name "Municipal Flat Block 18A, Linear North" alludes to socialist-style housing. Later in the film, when the new right-wing government takes power, the atmosphere is certainly more authoritarian than the anarchist air of the beginning. Kubrick's response to Ciment's question remained ambiguous as to exactly what kind of society it is. Kubrick did however assert that the film held comparisons between both the left and right end of the political spectrum and that there is little difference between the two. Kubrick stated, "The Minister, played by Anthony Sharp, is clearly a figure of the Right. The writer, Patrick Magee, is a lunatic of the Left...They differ only in their dogma. Their means and ends are hardly distinguishable."[16]A Clockwork Orange was photographed mostly on location in metropolitan London and within quick access of Kubrick's then home in Barnett Lane, Elstree.The few scenes not shot on location were the Korova Milk Bar, the prison check-in area, Alex taking a bath at F. Alexander's house and two corresponding scenes in the hallway. These sets were built at an old factory on Bullhead Road, Elstree, which also served as the production office.Otherwise, locations used in the film include:Despite the film's controversial nature, A Clockwork Orange was a hit with American audiences, grossing more than $26 million on a conservative budget of $2.2 million, and was critically well received and nominated for several awards, including the Academy Award for Best Picture (losing to The French Connection). It also boosted sales of Beethoven's Ninth Symphony. More recently, A Clockwork Orange earned a 91% "Certified Fresh" rating in the Rotten Tomatoes movie review website.[17]Despite general praise from critics, the film had notable detractors. Film critic Stanley Kauffmann commented, "Inexplicably the script leaves out Burgess' reference to the title".[18] Roger Ebert gave A Clockwork Orange two stars out of four, calling it an "ideological mess."[19] In the New Yorker review titled "Stanley Strangelove", Pauline Kael called it pornographic, because of how it dehumanised Alex's victims, while highlighting the sufferings of the protagonist. Kael derided Kubrick as a "bad pornographer", noting the Billyboy's gang extended stripping of the very buxom woman they intend to rape, claiming it was offered for titillation.[20]John Simon noted that the novel's most ambitious effects were based on language and the alienating effect of the narrator's Nadsat slang, making it a poor choice for a film. Concurring with some of Kael's criticisms about the depiction of Alex's victims, Simon noted that the writer character (young and likeable in the novel), was played by Patrick Magee, "a very quirky and middle-aged actor who specialises in being repellent"; and "Kubrick over-directs the basically excessive Magee until his eyes erupt, like missiles from their silos, and his face turns every shade of a Technicolor sunset."Along with Bonnie and Clyde (1967), The Wild Bunch (1969), Dirty Harry (1971) and Straw Dogs (1971), the film is considered a landmark in the relaxation of control on violence in the cinema.[21] In the United Kingdom, A Clockwork Orange was very controversial, and withdrawn from release by Kubrick himself. By the time it was re-released in 2000, it had attained "cult film" status.[citation needed] It is 21st in the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills and number 46 in the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies, although in the second listing it is ranked 70th of 100. "Alex De Large" is listed 12th in the villains section of the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains. In 2008, the AFI's 10 Top 10 rated A Clockwork Orange as the 4th greatest science-fiction movie to date.In the United States, A Clockwork Orange was rated X in its original release form. Kubrick later, voluntarily, replaced some 30 seconds of sexually explicit footage, from two scenes, with less bawdy action, for an R rating re-release in 1973. Current DVDs present the original X-rated form, and only some of the early 1980s VHS editions are the R-rated form.[22][23]The National Catholic Office for Motion Pictures rated it C ("Condemned") because of the explicit sex and violence. Conceptually, said rating of condemnation forbade Roman Catholics from seeing A Clockwork Orange. In 1982, the Office abolished the "Condemned" rating; hence, films that the Conference of Bishops deem to have unacceptable sex and violence are rated O, "Morally Offensive".[24]The British authorities considered the sexual violence extreme, furthermore, there occurred legal claims that the movie A Clockwork Orange had inspired true copycat crimes, as per press cuttings[clarification needed][citation needed] at the British Film Institute. In March 1972, at trial, the prosecutor accusing the fourteen-year-old-boy defendant of the manslaughter of a classmate, referred to A Clockwork Orange, telling the judge that the case had a macabre relevance to the film.[25] The attacker, a Bletchley boy of sixteen, pleaded guilty after telling police that friends had told him of the film "and the beating up of an old boy like this one"; defence counsel told the trial "the link between this crime and sensational literature, particularly A Clockwork Orange, is established beyond reasonable doubt".[26] The press also blamed the film for a rape in which the attackers sang "Singin' in the Rain".[27] Christiane Kubrick, the director's wife, has said that the family received threats and had protesters outside their home.[28] Subsequently, Kubrick asked Warner Brothers to withdraw the film from British distribution, disliking the allegation that the film was responsible for copycat violence in real life. Quoting Kubrick: "To try and fasten any responsibility on art as the cause of life seems to me to put the case the wrong way around. Art consists of reshaping life but it does not create life, nor cause life. Furthermore, to attribute powerful suggestive qualities to a film is at odds with the scientifically accepted view that, even after deep hypnosis, in a posthypnotic state, people cannot be made to do things which are at odds with their natures."[29] The Scala Cinema Club went into receivership in 1993 after losing a legal battle following an unauthorized screening of the film.[30]Whatever the reason for the film's withdrawal, for some 27 years, it was difficult to see the film in the United Kingdom. It reappeared in cinemas, and the first VHS and DVD releases followed soon after Kubrick's death in 1999. On 4 July 2001, the uncut A Clockwork Orange had its premiere broadcast on Sky TV's Sky Box Office; the run was until mid-September.In 1993, Channel 4 broadcast Forbidden Fruit, a 27-minute documentary about the controversial withdrawal of the film in Britain.[31] It contains much footage from A Clockwork Orange, marking the only time portions of the film were shown to British audiences during the twenty-seven-year ban.A Clockwork Orange was not marketed as a horror film, nor reviewed as one upon release. Over a period of time, it has gained a following among horror film aficionados, frequently discussed as one in online bulletin boards and chat rooms devoted to horror films (with some dissenters as to the classification), as well as being listed in an online horror film database. The UK daily paper Metro had a reader poll of favourite horror films in 2010 and reported that The Exorcist beat out Saw and A Clockwork Orange.[32]One well-known critic who counts the film as horror is Maitland McDonagh, senior movies editor of TVGuide from 1995 to 2008, and author of a book on the horror films of Dario Argento. Commenting on why horror films rarely win Oscars, she notes the exceptions of The Exorcist, Silence of the Lambs, and A Clockwork Orange saying the prestige of the directors meant the films could not be ignored.[33]On the other hand, American Movie Classics' film critic Cory Abbey in an article on scary movies that are not horror lists A Clockwork Orange [34] along with Jaws, Silence of the Lambs and others. When the American Film Institute chose their top 10 films in several genres, it listed Clockwork as a science-fiction film, while having no horror list at all.[35]Kubrick's film is relatively faithful to the Burgess novel, omitting only the final, positive chapter, wherein, Alex matures and outgrows sociopathy. Whereas the film ends with Alex offered an open-ended government job  implying he remains a sociopath at heart  the novel ends with Alex's positive change in character. This plot discrepancy occurred because Kubrick based his screenplay upon the novel's American edition, its final chapter deleted on insistence of the American publisher.[36] He claimed not to have read the complete, original version of the novel until he had almost finished writing the screenplay, and that he never considered using it. The introduction to the 1996 edition of A Clockwork Orange, says that Kubrick found the end of the original edition too blandly optimistic and unrealistic.In 2000, the film was released on VHS and DVD, both individually and as part of The Stanley Kubrick Collection DVD set. Consequent to negative comments from fans, Warner Bros re-released the film, its image digitally restored and its soundtrack remastered. A limited-edition collector's set with a soundtrack disc, movie poster, booklet and film strip followed, but later was discontinued. In 2005, a British re-release, packaged as an "Iconic Film" in a limited-edition slipcase was published, identical to the remastered DVD set, except for different package cover art. In 2006, Warner Bros announced the September publication of a two-disc special edition featuring a Malcolm McDowell commentary, and the releases of other two-disc sets of Stanley Kubrick films. Several British retailers had set the release date as 6 November 2006; the release was delayed and re-announced for 2007 Holiday Season.An HD DVD, Blu-ray, and DVD re-release version of the film was released on October 23, 2007. The release accompanies four other Kubrick classics. 1080p video transfers and remixed Dolby TrueHD 5.1 (for HD DVD) and uncompressed 5.1 PCM (for Blu-ray) audio tracks are on both the Blu-ray and HD DVD editions. Unlike the previous version, the DVD re-release edition is anamorphically enhanced. The Blu-ray was reissued for the 40th anniversary of the film's release, however this release is identical to the previously released Blu-ray, apart from adding a Digibook and the Stanley Kubrick: A Life in Pictures documentary as a bonus feature.December 19, 1971(1971-12-19) (USA)January 13, 1972(1972-01-13) (UK)1 Plot2 Cast3 Themes

3.1 Morality
3.2 Psychology

3.1 Morality3.2 Psychology4 Production

4.1 Adaptation

4.1.1 The novelist's response
4.1.2 Previous film versions


4.2 Direction
4.3 Nature of the society
4.4 Locations

4.1 Adaptation

4.1.1 The novelist's response
4.1.2 Previous film versions

4.1.1 The novelist's response4.1.2 Previous film versions4.2 Direction4.3 Nature of the society4.4 Locations5 Reception

5.1 Responses and controversy

5.1.1 American censorship
5.1.2 British withdrawal

5.1.2.1 Withdrawal controversy documentary





5.1 Responses and controversy

5.1.1 American censorship
5.1.2 British withdrawal

5.1.2.1 Withdrawal controversy documentary



5.1.1 American censorship5.1.2 British withdrawal

5.1.2.1 Withdrawal controversy documentary

5.1.2.1 Withdrawal controversy documentary6 Public perception of genre7 Differences between the film and the novel8 Soundtrack9 Awards and honours10 Home media releases11 In popular culture12 See also13 References14 Further reading15 External links3.1 Morality3.2 Psychology4.1 Adaptation

4.1.1 The novelist's response
4.1.2 Previous film versions

4.1.1 The novelist's response4.1.2 Previous film versions4.2 Direction4.3 Nature of the society4.4 Locations4.1.1 The novelist's response4.1.2 Previous film versions5.1 Responses and controversy

5.1.1 American censorship
5.1.2 British withdrawal

5.1.2.1 Withdrawal controversy documentary



5.1.1 American censorship5.1.2 British withdrawal

5.1.2.1 Withdrawal controversy documentary

5.1.2.1 Withdrawal controversy documentary5.1.1 American censorship5.1.2 British withdrawal

5.1.2.1 Withdrawal controversy documentary

5.1.2.1 Withdrawal controversy documentary5.1.2.1 Withdrawal controversy documentaryMalcolm McDowell as AlexJames Marcus as GeorgieWarren Clarke as DimMichael Tarn as PetePatrick Magee as Mr. Frank AlexanderAdrienne Corri as Mrs. Mary AlexanderMichael Bates as Chief Guard BarnesJohn Clive as Stage actorVirginia Wetherell as Stage ActressCarl Duering as Dr. BrodskyPaul Farrell as TrampBilly Russell as Professor attacked by Droogs in Library (scenes deleted)Richard Connaught as Billyboy, Gang LeaderClive Francis as Joe the LodgerMichael Gover as Prison GovernorMiriam Karlin as Cat LadyAubrey Morris as P. R. DeltoidGodfrey Quigley as Prison ChaplainSheila Raynor as MumMadge Ryan as Dr. BranomJohn Savident as ConspiratorAnthony Sharp as Frederick, Minister of the InteriorPhilip Stone as DadPauline Taylor as Dr. Taylor, psychiatristMargaret Tyzack as Conspirator RubinsteinSteven Berkoff as Detective Constable TomJohn J. Carney as Detective SergeantLindsay Campbell as Police InspectorDavid Prowse as Julian, Mr. Alexander's bodyguardThe attack on the tramp was filmed at the (now renovated) southern pedestrian underpass below Wandsworth Bridge roundabout, Wandsworth, London.The unused scene of the attack on the professor was shot in (now covered) Friars Square shopping centre in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, but dropped due to the actor dying for the subsequent scene where he recognises Alex towards the latter part of the film. In the end the tramp plays the character who recognises Alex.The Billyboy gang fight occurs at the demolished casino on Taggs Island, Kingston upon Thames, Middlesex.Alex's apartment is on the top floor of Century House tower block, Borehamwood, Middlesex. An exterior blue plaque and mosaic at ground level commemorate the film's location.The record shop where Alex picks up the two girls was in the basement of the former Chelsea Drugstore, located on the corner of Royal Avenue and King's Road in Chelsea. A McDonald's restaurant now occupies the building.The Menacing Cars scene where the Durango '95 drives under the lorry trailer was shot by Colney Heath on Bullens Green Lane at the crossroads of Fellows Lane, Hertfordshire.The writer's house, site of the rape and beating, was filmed at three different locations: The arrival in the "Durango 95" by the "HOME" sign was shot on the lane leading to Munden House which is off School Lane, Bricket Wood. The house's exterior and garden with the footbridge over the pond is Milton Grundy's Japanese garden in Shipton-under-Wychwood, Oxfordshire and the interior is Skybreak House, in The Warren, Radlett, Hertfordshire.Alex throws Dim and Georgie into South Mere lake at Thamesmead South Housing Estate, London. This is 200 yards north of where Alex walks home at night through an elevated plaza (now demolished) kicking rubbish.The Duke Of New York pub is the demolished "The Bottle and Dragon" pub (formerly "The Old Leather Bottle") in Stonegrove, Edgware, London.The Cat Lady house where Alex is caught by police is Shenley Lodge, Blackhorse Lane, Hertfordshire.The prison's exterior is HMP Wandsworth, its interior is the Woolwich Barracks now demolished prison wing, Woolwich, London.The two biblical fantasy scenes (Christ, and the fight scene) were filmed at Dashwood Mausoleum, West Wycombe, Buckinghamshire.The check-in at Ludovico Medical Clinic, the brain-washing film theatre, Alex's house lobby with the broken elevator, Alex's hospital bedroom and police interrogation/beating room (demolished) are all Brunel University, Uxbridge, Middlesex.The Minister's presentation to the media of Alex's "cure" takes place at the Nettlefold Hall inside West Norwood Library, West Norwood, London.Alex is attacked by vagrants underneath the north side of the Albert Bridge, Chelsea, London.The scene where Dim and Georgie take Alex in the police Landrover down the country lane and subsequent water trough beating is School Lane, Bricket Wood, Hertfordshire.Alex's suicide bid leap and corresponding billiard room were at the old Edgewarebury Country Club, Barnett Lane, Elstree, Hertfordshire.The hospital where Alex recovers is Princess Alexandra Hospital (Harlow), Essex.The final sexual fantasy was shot at the demolished Handley Page Ltd's hangars, Radlett, Hertfordshire.Critic Randy Rasmussen has argued that the government in the film is in a considerable shambles and in a state of desperation while the government in the novel is quite strong and self-confident. The former reflects Kubrick's preoccupation with the theme of acts of self-interest masked as simply following procedure.[37]
One example of this would be differences in the portrayal of P.R. Deltoid, Alex's "post-corrective advisor". In the novel, P.R. Deltoid appears to have some moral authority (although not enough to prevent Alex from lying to him or engaging in crime despite his protestations). In the film, Deltoid is slightly sadistic and seems to have a sexual interest in Alex, interviewing him in his parents' bedroom and smacking him in the crotch.In the film, Alex has a pet snake. There is no mention of this in the novel. This was added by Kubrick due to Malcolm McDowell's fear of snakes.[38]In the novel, F. Alexander recognises Alex through a number of careless references to the previous attack (e.g., his wife then claiming they did not have a telephone). In the film Alex is recognised when singing the song 'Singing in the Rain' in the bath, which he hauntingly had done whilst attacking F. Alexander's wife. The song does not appear at all in the book, as it was an improvisation by actor Malcolm McDowell when Kubrick complained that the rape scene was too "stiff".[39]In the novel Alex is offered up for the treatment after killing a fellow inmate that was sexually harassing him. In the film this scene was cut out and instead of Alex practically volunteering for the procedure, he was simply selected by the head of the government due to speaking out of turn.In the novel, Alex drugs and rapes two ten-year old girls, whereas in the film the girls are full grown young adults that seem rather to have consensual, playful sex with him, with no suggestion of using any drugs, and without any violence.In the novel, the writer was working on a manuscript called A Clockwork Orange when Alex and his gang are breaking into his house. In the movie, the title of the manuscript is not visible, leaving no literal reference to the title of the movie. Some explanations of the title are offered in the Analysis section of the novel.Early in the film, Alex and his droogs brutally attack a drunk, homeless man. Later, when Alex is returned to society he is recognized by the same man who gathers several other homeless men to beat Alex who is unable to defend himself. These scenes do not appear in the book but there is a similar scene in which an elderly man heading home from the library is beaten and his books destroyed by the droogs. After Alex is returned to society he decides he wants to kill himself and goes to a library to find a book on how to do it. There he is recognized by the man he had beaten and is attacked by him and a gang of other old library patrons.Alex is beaten nearly to death by the police after his rehabilitation. In the film the policemen are his former droogs Dim and Georgie. In the book, instead of Georgie, the second officer is Billy Boy who was the leader of the opposing gang that Alex and his droogs fought earlier in both the movie and the book. This is a significant difference because while Dim and Georgie had only been mocked and humiliated by Alex before his treatment, Billy Boy had been nearly killed which implies the beating that Alex took at his hands was probably much more savage and hate filled.In the book word came to Alex that former droog Georgie had been killed in a never explained way. In the movie Georgie is one of the policemen who brutally beat Alex after his release from prison.Academy Awards

Best Director  Stanley Kubrick (nominated)
Best Film Editing  Bill Butler (nominated)
Best Picture (nominated)
Best Adapted Screenplay  Stanley Kubrick (nominated)

Best Director  Stanley Kubrick (nominated)Best Film Editing  Bill Butler (nominated)Best Picture (nominated)Best Adapted Screenplay  Stanley Kubrick (nominated)Best Director  Stanley Kubrick (nominated)Best Film Editing  Bill Butler (nominated)Best Picture (nominated)Best Adapted Screenplay  Stanley Kubrick (nominated)BAFTA Awards

BAFTA Film Award Best Art Direction  John Barry
Best Cinematography  John Alcott
Best Direction  Stanley Kubrick
Best Film
Best Film Editing  Bill Butler
Best Screenplay  Stanley Kubrick
Best Sound Track  Brian Blamey, John Jordan, Bill Rowe

BAFTA Film Award Best Art Direction  John BarryBest Cinematography  John AlcottBest Direction  Stanley KubrickBest FilmBest Film Editing  Bill ButlerBest Screenplay  Stanley KubrickBest Sound Track  Brian Blamey, John Jordan, Bill RoweBAFTA Film Award Best Art Direction  John BarryBest Cinematography  John AlcottBest Direction  Stanley KubrickBest FilmBest Film Editing  Bill ButlerBest Screenplay  Stanley KubrickBest Sound Track  Brian Blamey, John Jordan, Bill RoweDirectors Guild of America

1972 Nominated DGA Award Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures  Stanley Kubrick

1972 Nominated DGA Award Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures  Stanley Kubrick1972 Nominated DGA Award Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures  Stanley KubrickGolden Globes[40]

nominated 1972 Nominated Golden Globe Best Director: Motion Picture  Stanley Kubrick
nominated Best Motion Picture  Drama
nominated Best Motion Picture Actor: Drama  Malcolm McDowell

nominated 1972 Nominated Golden Globe Best Director: Motion Picture  Stanley Kubricknominated Best Motion Picture  Dramanominated Best Motion Picture Actor: Drama  Malcolm McDowellnominated 1972 Nominated Golden Globe Best Director: Motion Picture  Stanley Kubricknominated Best Motion Picture  Dramanominated Best Motion Picture Actor: Drama  Malcolm McDowellHugo Awards

1972 Won Hugo Best Dramatic Presentation

1972 Won Hugo Best Dramatic Presentation1972 Won Hugo Best Dramatic PresentationNew York Film Critics Circle Awards

1971 Won NYFCC Award Best Director  Stanley Kubrick
Best Film

1971 Won NYFCC Award Best Director  Stanley KubrickBest Film1971 Won NYFCC Award Best Director  Stanley KubrickBest FilmWriters Guild of America, United States

1972 Nominated WGA Award (Screen) Best Drama Adapted from Another Medium  Stanley Kubrick

1972 Nominated WGA Award (Screen) Best Drama Adapted from Another Medium  Stanley Kubrick1972 Nominated WGA Award (Screen) Best Drama Adapted from Another Medium  Stanley KubrickIn 2008, Empire magazine rank this at #37 on their list of "The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time."Aestheticisation of violenceList of stories set in a future now pastBurgess, Anthony. 1978. "A Clockwork Orange". London: Hutchinson. ISBN 0-09-136080-3Stuart Y. McDougal, Stanley Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange (Cambridge University Press, 2003). ISBN 0-521-57376-9Stanley Kubrick at Warner Bros. Official Website.A Clockwork Orange analysis from Sparknotes.A Clockwork Orange at the Internet Movie DatabaseA Clockwork Orange at Box Office MojoA Clockwork Orange at Rotten TomatoesA Clockwork Orange at MalcolmMcDowell.net. The most comprehensive site on A Clockwork Orange.A Clockwork Orange at Discogs (list of releases)Malcolm McDowell discusses the film and its staying power from HoboTrashcan.comTaxi Driver is a 1976 American psychological thriller film directed by Martin Scorsese and written by Paul Schrader. The film is set in New York City, soon after the Vietnam War. The film stars Robert De Niro and features Jodie Foster, Harvey Keitel, and Cybill Shepherd. The film was nominated for four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, and won the Palme d'Or at the 1976 Cannes Film Festival. The American Film Institute ranked Taxi Driver as the 52nd greatest American film on their AFI's 100 Years100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) list. The film was considered "culturally, historically or aesthetically" significant by the US Library of Congress and was selected to be preserved in the National Film Registry in 1994.Travis Bickle (Robert De Niro), an honorably discharged U.S. Marine, is a lonely and depressed man living in Manhattan, New York. He becomes a taxi driver in order to cope with chronic insomnia, driving passengers every night around the boroughs of New York City. He also spends time in seedy porn theaters and keeps a diary. Travis becomes infatuated with Betsy (Cybill Shepherd), a campaign volunteer for Senator Charles Palantine (Leonard Harris), who is running for President. After watching her through her office window, interacting with fellow worker Tom (Albert Brooks), Travis enters to volunteer as a pretext to talk to her and takes her out for coffee. On a later date he takes her to see a sex film, which offends her, so she goes home alone. His attempts at reconciliation by sending flowers are rebuffed so he berates her at the campaign office, before being kicked out by Tom.Travis confides in fellow taxi driver Wizard (Peter Boyle) about his thoughts, which are beginning to turn violent, but Wizard assures him that he will be fine. Disgusted by the street crime and prostitution that he witnesses through the city, Travis finds a focus for his frustration and begins a program of intense physical training. He buys guns from dealer Easy Andy (Steven Prince) and constructs a sleeve gun to attach on his arm with which he practices drawing his weapons. One night, Travis enters a convenience store moments before a man attempts to rob it and shoots the robber. The shop owner (Victor Argo) takes responsibility and Travis leaves. On another night, 12-year-old child prostitute Iris (Jodie Foster) enters Travis's cab, attempting to escape her pimp Matthew "Sport" (Harvey Keitel). Sport drags Iris from the cab and throws Travis a crumpled twenty-dollar bill, which continually reminds him of her. Travis arranges to meet Iris and attempts to persuade her to quit prostitution. They meet again the next day for breakfast and Travis becomes obsessed with helping her return to her parents' home, sending her money to do so and a letter in which he states he will soon be dead.After shaving his head into a mohawk, Travis attends a public rally where he attempts to assassinate Senator Palantine, but Secret Service agents notice him and he flees without taking a shot. He returns to his apartment and then drives to the East Village, where he confronts Sport. Travis shoots him, then walks into Iris brothel and shoots off the bouncer's fingers. After Sport shoots Travis in the neck, wounding him, Travis shoots him dead. Another thug appears and shoots Travis in the arm, but Travis reveals his sleeve gun and kills the thug. The bouncer continues to harass Travis, causing Travis to shoot him in the head and kill him. As a horrified Iris cries, Travis attempts suicide but, out of ammunition, resigns himself to a sofa until police arrive. When they do, he places his index finger against his temple gesturing the act of shooting himself. Recuperating, Travis receives a letter from Iris's parents who thank him for saving her and the media hail him as a hero. Travis then returns to his job and encounters Betsy as a fare. She discusses his newly found fame, but he denies being a hero and drops her off for free. He glances anxiously at an object in his rear view mirror as he drives away.According to Scorsese it was Brian De Palma who introduced him to Schrader. In Scorsese on Scorsese, edited by David M. Thompson and Ian Christie, the director talks about how much of the film arose from his feeling that movies are like dreams, or like taking dope and that he tried to induce the feeling of being almost awake. He calls Travis an avenging angel floating through the streets of New York City, which was meant to represent all cities. Scorsese calls attention to improvisation in the film, such as in the scene between De Niro and Cybill Shepherd in the coffee-shop. The director also cites Alfred Hitchcocks The Wrong Man and Jack Hazans A Bigger Splash as inspiration for his camerawork in the movie.[2]In Scorsese on Scorsese the director mentions the religious symbolism in the story comparing Bickle to a saint who wants to clean up both life and his mind. Bickle attempts suicide at the end of the movie as a way to mimic the Samurais death with honour principle.[2]When Travis meets Betsy to join him for coffee and pie, he reminds her of a line in Kris Kristofferson's song "The Pilgrim, Chapter 33": "He's a prophet and a pusher, partly truth, partly fictiona walking contradiction." On their date, Bickle takes her to see Language of Love, a Swedish sex education film.[3]Shot during a New York summer heat wave and garbage strike, Taxi Driver came into conflict with the MPAA for its violence (Scorsese desaturated the color in the final shoot-out and got an R). To achieve the atmospheric scenes in Bickle's cab, the sound men would get in the trunk and Scorsese and his cinematographer, Michael Chapman, would fit themselves on the back seat floor and use available light to shoot.In writing the script, Paul Schrader was inspired by the diaries of Arthur Bremer (who shot presidential candidate George Wallace in 1972)[4] and Fyodor Dostoyevskys Notes from Underground. The writer also used himself as an inspiration, prior to writing the screenplay Schrader was in a lonely and alienated position, much like Bickle. Following a divorce and a break-up with a live-in girlfriend, he spent a few weeks living in his car. He wrote the script in under a month while staying in his former girlfriend's apartment while she was away.Schrader decided to make Bickle a Vietnam vet because the national trauma of the war seemed to blend perfectly with Bickles paranoid psychosis making his experiences after the war more intense and threatening. Thus, Bickle chooses to drive his taxi anywhere in the city as a way to feed his hate.[5]While preparing for his role as Bickle, De Niro was filming Bernardo Bertolucci's 1900 in Italy. According to Boyle, he would "finish shooting on a Friday in Rome...get on a plane...[and] fly to New York." De Niro obtained a cab driver's license, and when on break would pick up a cab and drive around New York for a couple of weeks, before returning to Rome to resume filming 1900. De Niro apparently lost 35 pounds and listened repeatedly to a taped reading of the diaries of Arthur Bremer. When he had time off from shooting 1900, De Niro visited an army base in Northern Italy and tape recorded soldiers from the Midwestern United States, whose accents he thought might be appropriate for Travis's character.When Bickle determines to assassinate Senator Palantine, he cuts his hair into a Mohawk. This detail was suggested by actor Victor Magnotta, a friend of Scorsese's who had a small role as a Secret Service agent and who had served in Vietnam. Scorsese later noted, "Magnotta had talked about certain types of soldiers going into the jungle. They cut their hair in a certain way; looked like a Mohawk... and you knew that was a special situation, a commando kind of situation, and people gave them wide berths ... we thought it was a good idea."Jodie Foster was not the first choice to play Iris. Scorsese considered Melanie Griffith, Linda Blair, Bo Derek, and Carrie Fisher for the role. A newcomer, Mariel Hemingway, auditioned for the role, but turned it down due to pressure from her family. After the other actresses turned down the role, Foster - an experienced child actor - was chosen.In the original draft Schrader had written the role of Sport as a black man. There were also additions of other negative black roles. Scorsese believed that this would give the film an overly racist subtext so they were changed to white roles, although the film implies that Travis himself is a racist. Cab drivers in the film refer to Harlem as Mau Mau land, and Travis exchanges hostile eye contact with several black characters. Schrader set the film in Los Angeles; it was moved to New York City because taxis were much more prevalent there than in L.A. during the 1970s.The music by Bernard Herrmann was his final score before his death on December 24, 1975, and the film is dedicated to his memory. Robert Barnett of MusicWeb International has said that it contrasts deep, sleazy noises representing the "scum" that Travis sees all over the city with the saxophone, a musical counterpart of Travis, creating a mellifluously disenchanted troubadour. Barnett also observes that the opposing noises in the soundtrack gritty little harp figures are as hard as shards of steel as well as a jazz drum-kit placing the drama in the city indicative of loneliness while surrounded by people. Deep brass and woodwind are also evident. Barnett heard in the drumbeat a wild-eyed martial air charting the pressure on Bickle, who is increasingly oppressed by the corruption around him, and that the harp, drum and saxophone play extremely significant roles in all this music.[7]The soundtrack for the film, re-released in 1998 on CD, includes an expanded version of the score as well as the re-recorded tracks from the original 1976 LP. It also features album notes by director Martin Scorsese, as well as full documentation for the tracks linking them in great detail to individual takes.Track 12, "Diary of a Taxi Driver", features Herrmann's music with Robert De Niro's voiceover taken direct from the soundtrack.Also featured in the film is Jackson Browne's "Late for the Sky", appearing in a scene where couples are dancing on the program American Bandstand to the song as Travis watches on his small TV.Some of the tracks feature relatively long titles, representative of the fact that similar reprises are heard in many scenes.The climactic shoot-out was considered intensely graphic at the time it was initially released.[8] To attain an "R" rating, Scorsese had the colors desaturated, making the brightly colored blood less prominent.[9] In later interviews, Scorsese commented that he was actually pleased by the color change and he considered it an improvement over the originally filmed scene, which has been lost. In the special edition DVD, Michael Chapman, the film's cinematographer, regrets the decision and the fact that no print with the unmuted colors exists anymore, as the originals had long since deteriorated.Some critics expressed concern over 13-year-old Jodie Foster's presence during the climactic shoot-out. However, Foster stated that she was present during the setup and staging of the special effects used during the scene; the entire process was explained and demonstrated for her, step by step. Rather than being upset or traumatized, Foster said, she was fascinated and entertained by the behind-the-scenes preparation that went into the scene. In addition, before being given the part, Foster was subjected to psychological testing to ensure that she would not be emotionally scarred by her role, in accordance with California Labor Board requirements.[10]Copies of the movie distributed for TV broadcast had an unexplained disclaimer added during the closing credits:[11][12]Taxi Driver formed part of the delusional fantasy of John Hinckley, Jr.[13][14] which triggered his attempted assassination of President Ronald Reagan in 1981, an act for which he was found not guilty by reason of insanity.[15][16] Hinckley stated that his actions were an attempt to impress actress Jodie Foster, on whom Hinckley was fixated, by mimicking Travis's mohawked appearance at the Palantine rally. His attorney concluded his defense by playing the movie for the jury.Roger Ebert has written of the film's ending:"There has been much discussion about the ending, in which we see newspaper clippings about Travis's 'heroism' of saving Iris, and then Betsy gets into his cab and seems to give him admiration instead of her earlier disgust. Is this a fantasy scene? Did Travis survive the shoot-out? Are we experiencing his dying thoughts? Can the sequence be accepted as literally true? ... I am not sure there can be an answer to these questions. The end sequence plays like music, not drama: It completes the story on an emotional, not a literal, level. We end not on carnage but on redemption, which is the goal of so many of Scorsese's characters."[17]James Berardinelli, in his review of the film, argues against the dream or fantasy interpretation, stating:"Scorsese and writer Paul Schrader append the perfect conclusion to Taxi Driver. Steeped in irony, the five-minute epilogue underscores the vagaries of fate. The media builds Bickle into a hero, when, had he been a little quicker drawing his gun against Senator Palantine, he would have been reviled as an assassin. As the film closes, the misanthrope has been embraced as the model citizensomeone who takes on pimps, drug dealers, and mobsters to save one little girl."[18]On the Laserdisc audio commentary, Scorsese acknowledged several critics' interpretation on the film's ending being Bickle's dying dream. He admits that the last scene of Bickle glancing at an unseen object implies that he might fall into rage and recklessness in the future, and he is like "a ticking time bomb."[19] Writer Paul Schrader confirms this in his commentary on the 30th anniversary DVD, stating that Travis "is not cured by the movie's end," and that, "he's not going to be a hero next time."[20]Filmed on a budget of $1.3 million, Taxi Driver was a financial success earning $28,262,574 in the United States,[21] making it the 17th-highest-grossing film of 1976.Roger Ebert instantly praised it as one of the greatest films hed ever seen, claiming:"Taxi Driver" is a hell, from the opening shot of a cab emerging from stygian clouds of steam to the climactic killing scene in which the camera finally looks straight down. Scorsese wanted to look away from Travis's rejection; we almost want to look away from his life. But he's there, all right, and he's suffering.[22]It was also nominated for four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor (De Niro), and received the Palme d'Or, at the 1976 Cannes Film Festival.[23] It has been selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.[24] The film was chosen by Time as one of the 100 best films of all time.[25]As of 2012, Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 98% based on reviews from 60 critics.[26]The July/August 2009 issue of Film Comment polled several critics on the best films to win the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival. Taxi Driver placed first above films such as Il Gattopardo, Viridiana, Blowup, The Conversation, Apocalypse Now, La Dolce Vita and Pulp Fiction.[27]In the American Film Institute's top 50 movie villains of all time, Bickle was named the 30th greatest film villain. Empire also ranked him 18th in their "The 100 Greatest Movie Characters" poll.[28]Taxi Driver, American Gigolo, Light Sleeper, and The Walker make up a series referred to variously as the "Man in a Room" or "Night Worker" movies. Screenwriter Paul Schrader (who directed the other three films) has stated that he considers the central characters of the four films to be one character, who has changed as he has aged.[29][30] The film also influenced the Charles Winkler film You Talkin' to Me?[31]The catchphrase "You talkin' to me?" has become a pop culture icon. In 2005, it was chosen as #10 on the American Film Institute's AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes.[32]In the scene, Bickle is looking into a mirror at himself, imagining a confrontation which would give him a chance to draw his gun. He says the following line:Roger Ebert called it "the truest line in the film... Travis Bickle's desperate need to make some kind of contact somehow - to share or mimic the effortless social interaction he sees all around him, but does not participate in."Paul Schrader does not take credit for the line, saying that his script only read, "Travis speaks to himself in the mirror", and that De Niro improvised the dialogue. However, Schrader went on to say that De Niro's performance was inspired by a routine by "an underground New York comedian" whom he had once seen, possibly including his signature line.[33]In his 2009 memoir, saxophonist Clarence Clemons said De Niro explained the line's origins when Clemons coached De Niro to play the saxophone for the movie New York, New York.[34] Clemons says De Niro had seen Bruce Springsteen say it onstage at a concert as fans were screaming his name, and decided to make the line his own.[35] The first collector's edition (DVD), released was in 1999 packaged as a single disc edition release. It contained special features such as behind-the-scenes and several trailers including one, for Taxi Driver.In 2006, a 30th anniversary 2-disc collector's edition was released. The first disc contains the movie itself, two commentaries (one by writer Paul Schrader and the other by Professor Robert Kolker), and trailers. This edition also retains some of the special features from the earlier release on the second disc, as well as some newly-produced documentary material.A Blu-ray of the film was released on April 5, 2011, in time to commemorate the film's 35th anniversary. It includes the special features from the previous 2-disc collector's edition, plus an audio commentary released in 1991 by director Martin Scorsese for The Criterion Collection, previously released on Laserdisc.As part of the Blu-ray production, Sony gave the film a full 4K digital restoration, which included scanning and cleaning the original negative (removing emulsion dirt and scratches). Colors were matched to director-approved prints under guidance from Scorsese and director of photography Michael Chapman. An all new lossless DTS-HD Master Audio 5.1 soundtrack was also made from the original stereo recordings by Scorsese's personal sound team.[36][37] The restored print premiered in February 2011 at the Berlin Film Festival, and to promote the Blu-ray, Sony also had the print screened at AMC Theaters nationwide on March 19 and 22.In late January 2005 a sequel was announced by Robert De Niro and Martin Scorsese.[38] At a 25th anniversary screening of Raging Bull, De Niro talked about the story of an older Travis Bickle being in development. Also in 2000, De Niro mentioned interest in bringing back the character in conversation with Actors Studio host James Lipton.[39]At the Berlinale 2010, De Niro, Scorsese, and Lars von Trier announced plans to work on a remake of Taxi Driver. The film will be produced in a similar manner to von Trier's The Five Obstructions.[40]In December 2011, Martin Scorsese was interviewed about combining his passion for 3D as a new medium with the legacy of older films, and said that if he could go back in time he would "shoot Taxi Driver in 3D." More specifically, he envisioned "Bob De Niro in the mirror as Travis Bickle. Imagine how intimidating: You talking to me? You talking to me? Amazing possibilities." [41]February 8, 1976(1976-02-08)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Music

4.1 Track listing

4.1 Track listing5 Controversies

5.1 John Hinckley, Jr.

5.1 John Hinckley, Jr.6 Interpretations of the ending7 Reaction

7.1 Critical and box office reception
7.2 Accolades
7.3 Legacy

7.3.1 You talkin' to me?



7.1 Critical and box office reception7.2 Accolades7.3 Legacy

7.3.1 You talkin' to me?

7.3.1 You talkin' to me?8 Home video releases9 Sequel/Remake10 Notes11 External links4.1 Track listing5.1 John Hinckley, Jr.7.1 Critical and box office reception7.2 Accolades7.3 Legacy

7.3.1 You talkin' to me?

7.3.1 You talkin' to me?7.3.1 You talkin' to me?Robert De Niro as Travis BickleJodie Foster as Iris "Easy" SteensmaHarvey Keitel as Matthew "Sport" HigginsCybill Shepherd as BetsyAlbert Brooks as TomLeonard Harris as Senator Charles PalantinePeter Boyle as "Wizard"Harry Northup as DoughboyMartin Scorsese as Passenger Watching SilhouetteVictor Argo as MelioSteven Prince as "Easy Andy"Joe Spinell as Personnel OfficerDiahnne Abbott as Concession GirlBAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Jodie Foster)BAFTA Award for Best Newcomer (Jodie Foster)BAFTA Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music (Bernard Herrmann)Cannes Film Festival Palme d'OrNew York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor (Robert De Niro)Academy Award for Best PictureAcademy Award for Best Actor (Robert De Niro)Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress (Jodie Foster)Academy Award for Original Music Score (Bernard Herrmann)BAFTA Award for Best FilmBAFTA Award for Direction (Martin Scorsese)BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role (Robert De Niro)BAFTA Award for Best Editing (Marcia Lucas, Tom Rolf, Melvin Shapiro)Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Drama (Robert De Niro)Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay - Motion Picture (Paul Schrader)DGA Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures (Martin Scorsese)WGA Award for Best Drama Written Directly for the Screen (Paul Schrader)Grammy Award for Best Original Score Written for a Motion Picture (Bernard Herrmann)Taxi Driver at the Internet Movie DatabaseTaxi Driver at the TCM Movie DatabaseTaxi Driver at AllRoviTaxi Driver at Rotten TomatoesJaws is a 1975 American horror/thriller film directed by Steven Spielberg and based on Peter Benchley's novel of the same name. The prototypical summer blockbuster, its release is regarded as a watershed moment in motion picture history. In the story, a giant man-eating great white shark attacks beachgoers on Amity Island, a fictional summer resort town, prompting the local police chief to hunt it with the help of a marine biologist and a professional shark hunter. The film stars Roy Scheider as police chief Martin Brody, Richard Dreyfuss as oceanographer Matt Hooper, Robert Shaw as shark hunter Quint, Murray Hamilton as the mayor of Amity Island, and Lorraine Gary as Brody's wife, Ellen. The screenplay is credited to both Benchley, who wrote the first drafts, and actor-writer Carl Gottlieb, who rewrote the script during principal photography.Shot mostly on location on Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts, the film had a troubled production, going over budget and past schedule. As the art department's mechanical sharks suffered many malfunctions, Spielberg decided to mostly suggest the animal's presence, employing an ominous, minimalistic theme created by composer John Williams to indicate the shark's impending appearances. Spielberg and others have compared this suggestive approach to that of classic thriller director Alfred Hitchcock. Universal Pictures gave the film what was then an exceptionally wide release for a major studio picture, over 450 screens, accompanied by an extensive marketing campaign with a heavy emphasis on television spots and tie-in merchandise.Generally well received by critics, Jaws became the highest-grossing film in history at the time. It won several awards for its soundtrack and editing, and it is often cited as one of the greatest films of all time. Along with 1977's Star Wars, Jaws was pivotal in establishing the modern Hollywood business model, which revolves around blockbuster action and adventure pictures with simple "high-concept" premises that are released during the summer in thousands of theaters and supported by heavy advertising. It was followed by three sequels, none with the participation of Spielberg or Benchley, and many imitative thrillers. In 2001, Jaws was selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the United States National Film Registry, being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".A girl named Chrissie Watkins leaves an evening beach party on New England's Amity Island to go skinny dipping in the Atlantic Ocean. After swimming out near a buoy, she is seized by an unseen force from below that thrashes her around before dragging her below the surface.Chrissie is reported missing and her remains are found on the beach by police chief Martin Brody. The medical examiner informs Brody that she was killed by a shark. Brody plans to close the beaches but is overruled by Mayor Larry Vaughan, who fears that reports of a shark attack will ruin the summer tourist season, the town's primary source of income. The medical examiner consequently attributes the death to a boating accident. Brody reluctantly goes along with the explanation. The shark then kills a young boy swimming at the beach. His mother places a bounty on the shark, sparking an amateur shark-hunting frenzy and attracting the attention of local professional shark hunter Quint, who offers to kill the shark for $10,000, valuing his own life at no less. Marine biologist Matt Hooper examines Chrissie's remains and determines that she was killed by a shark, not a boat.A large tiger shark is caught by fishermen, leading the townspeople to believe the problem is solved, but Hooper asks to examine its stomach contents. Vaughan refuses to allow the necropsy. That evening, Brody and Hooper discover the dead shark does not contain human remains. They head out to sea in an attempt to find the shark. Instead, they discover the half-sunken wreckage of a boat belonging to local fisherman Ben Gardner. Hooper explores the vessel underwater and discovers a sizable shark's tooth protruding from the damaged hull before he is startled by Gardner's remains and drops the tooth. Without evidence, Vaughan refuses to close the beaches, and on the Fourth of July many tourists arrive. A children's prank causes panic at the main beach while the shark enters a nearby estuary, killing a man; Brody's son, who witnesses the attack, goes into shock. Brody persuades Vaughan to hire Quint. Quint reluctantly allows Hooper and Brody to join the hunt, but forces them to accept crew mate positions under him as a captain. The three set out to kill the shark aboard Quint's vessel, the Orca.Brody is given the task of laying a chum line while Quint uses piano wire to try to hook the shark. Later, an enormous great white shark looms up behind the boat, and the trio watch it circle the Orca while Hooper takes pictures for research and Quint estimates its size as twenty-five feet in length, with a weight of 6,000 pounds. Quint harpoons it with a line attached to a flotation barrel, but the shark pulls the barrel under and disappears.The men retire to the boat's cabin, where Quint relates his experience with sharks as a survivor of the sinking of the warship USSIndianapolis in 1945 during World War II . The shark reappears, damaging the boat's hull before slipping away. In the morning, the shark appears again and Brody attempts to call the U.S. Coast Guard, but Quint destroys the radio and harpoons the shark with another barrel. After a long chase, Quint harpoons another barrel to the shark. The men tie them both to the stern, but the shark drags the boat backwards, forcing water onto the deck and flooding the engine. Quint heads toward shore, hoping to draw it into shallow waters and suffocate it. In his obsession to kill the shark, Quint burns out the bearings in the Orca's engine.With the boat immobilized, the trio attempt a desperate approach: Hooper dons scuba gear and enters the ocean inside a shark proof cage, aiming to stab the shark with a hypodermic spear filled with strychnine. The shark attacks the cage from behind, causing Hooper to drop the spear. When the shark gets tangled in the wrecked cage, Hooper escapes and hides in the seabed. As Quint and Brody raise the mangled cage, the shark leaps onto the boat, crushing the transom and causing the Orca to raise up. Quint slides down the watery deck to the shark and is killed after a bloody tussle, stabbing the shark in the head with a machete. When the shark attacks again, Brody shoves a pressurized scuba tank into its mouth, then takes Quint's rifle and climbs the sinking Orca's mast. The shark, with the tank still in its mouth, begins charging Brody. Brody shoots the scuba tank, causing it to explode and blow the shark to pieces. Hooper swims to the surface and they use the barrels to swim to shore.Richard D. Zanuck and David Brown, producers at Universal Pictures, independently heard about Peter Benchley's novel Jaws. Brown came across it in the fiction department of the Cosmopolitan lifestyle magazine, then edited by his wife, Helen Gurley Brown. A small card written by the magazine's book editor gave a detailed description of the plot, concluding with the comment "might make a good movie".[1][2] The producers each read the book over the course of a single night and agreed the next morning that it was "the most exciting thing that they had ever read" and that they wanted to produce a film version, although they were unsure how it would be accomplished.[3] They purchased the movie rights in 1973, before the book's publication, for approximately $175,000.[4] Brown claimed that had they read the book twice, they would never have made the film because they would have realized how difficult it would be to execute certain sequences.[5]To direct, Zanuck and Brown first considered veteran filmmaker John Sturgeswhose rsum included another maritime adventure, The Old Man and the Seabefore offering the job to Dick Richards, whose directorial debut, The Culpepper Cattle Co. had come out the previous year.[6] However, they grew irritated by Richards's habit of describing the shark as a whale and soon dropped him from the project.[6] Meanwhile, Steven Spielberg very much wanted the job. The 26-year-old had just directed his first theatrical film, The Sugarland Express, for Zanuck and Brown. At the end of a meeting in their office, Spielberg noticed their copy of the still-unpublished Benchley novel, and after reading it was immediately captivated.[4] He later observed that it was similar to his 1971 television film Duel in that both deal with "these leviathans targeting everymen."[3] After Richards's departure, the producers signed Spielberg to direct in June 1973, before the release of The Sugarland Express.[6]Before production began, however, Spielberg grew reluctant to continue with Jaws, in fear of becoming typecast as the "truck and shark director".[7] He wanted to move over to 20th Century Fox's Lucky Lady instead, but Universal exercised its right under its contract with the director to veto his departure.[8] Brown helped convince Spielberg to stick with the project, saying that "after [Jaws], you can make all the films you want".[7] The film was given an estimated budget of $3.5million and a shooting schedule of 55days. Principal photography was set to begin in May 1974. Universal wanted the shoot to finish by the end of June, when the major studios' contract with the Screen Actors Guild was due to expire, to avoid any disruptions due to a potential strike.[9]For the adaptation, Spielberg wanted to stick with the novel's basic concept, while removing Benchley's many subplots.[4] He declared that his favorite part of the book was the shark hunt on the last 120pages, and told Zanuck when he accepted the job, "I'd like to do the picture if I could change the first two acts and base the first two acts on original screenplay material, and then be very true to the book for the last third."[10] When the producers purchased the rights to his novel, they promised Benchley that he could write the first draft of the screenplay. Overall, he wrote three drafts before the script was turned over to other writers;[4] delivering his final version to Spielberg, he declared, "I'm written out on this, and that's the best I can do."[11] One of his changes was to remove the novel's adulterous affair between Ellen Brody and Matt Hooper, at the suggestion of Spielberg, who feared it would compromise the camaraderie between the men on the Orca.[12] (During the film's production, Benchley agreed to return and play a small onscreen role as a reporter.)[13]Spielberg, who felt that the characters in Benchley's script were still unlikable, invited the young screenwriter John Byrum to do a rewrite, but he turned down the offer.[7] Columbo creators William Link and Richard Levinson also declined Spielberg's invitation.[14] Tony and Pulitzer Prizewinning playwright Howard Sackler was in Los Angeles when the filmmakers began looking for another writer and offered to do an uncredited rewrite; since the producers and Spielberg were unhappy with Benchley's drafts, they quickly agreed.[3]Spielberg wanted "some levity" in Jaws, jokes that would avoid making it "a dark sea hunt," so he turned to his friend Carl Gottlieb, a comedy writer-actor then working on the sitcom The Odd Couple.[11] Spielberg sent Gottlieb a script, asking what the writer would change and if there was a role he would be interested in performing.[15] Gottlieb sent Spielberg three pages of notes, and picked the part of Meadows, the politically connected editor of the local paper. He passed the audition one week before Spielberg took him to meet the producers regarding a writing job.[16]While the deal was initially for a "one-week dialogue polish", Gottlieb eventually became the primary screenwriter, rewriting the entire script during a nine-week period of principal photography.[16] The script for each scene was typically finished the night before it was shot, after Gottlieb had dinner with Spielberg and members of the cast and crew to decide what would go into the film. Many pieces of dialogue originated from the actors' improvisations during these meals; a few were created on set, most notably Roy Scheider's ad-lib of the line "You're gonna need a bigger boat."[17] John Milius contributed dialogue polishes,[18] and Sugarland Express writers Matthew Robbins and Hal Barwood also made uncredited contributions.[19] Spielberg has claimed that he prepared his own draft, although it is unclear to what degree the other screenwriters drew on his material.[18] One specific alteration he called for in the story was to change the cause of the shark's death from extensive wounds to a scuba tank explosion, as he felt audiences would respond better to a "big rousing ending."[20] The director estimated the final script had a total of 27 scenes that were not in the book.[12]Benchley had written Jaws after reading about sport fisherman Frank Mundus's capture of an enormous shark in 1964. According to Gottlieb, Quint was loosely based on Mundus, whose book Sportfishing for Sharks he read for research.[21] Sackler came up with the backstory of Quint as a survivor of the World War II USSIndianapolis disaster.[22] The question of who deserves the most credit for writing Quint's celebrated monologue about the Indianapolis has caused substantial controversy. Spielberg described it as a collaboration between Sackler, Milius, and actor Robert Shaw, who was also a playwright.[18] According to the director, Milius turned Sackler's "three-quarters of a page" speech into a monologue, and that was then rewritten by Shaw.[22] Gottlieb gives primary credit to Shaw, downplaying Milius's contribution.[23]Though Spielberg complied with a request from Zanuck and Brown to cast known actors,[13] he wanted to avoid hiring any big stars. He felt that "somewhat anonymous" performers would help the audience "believe this was happening to people like you and me", whereas "stars bring a lot of memories along with them, and those memories can sometimes ... corrupt the story."[19] The director added that in his plans "the superstar was gonna be the shark".[11] The first actors cast were Lorraine Gary, the wife of then-president of Universal Sid Sheinberg, as Ellen Brody,[13] and Murray Hamilton as the mayor of Amity Island.[24] Stuntwoman-turned-actress Susan Backlinie was cast as Chrissie as she knew how to swim and was willing to perform nude.[11] Most minor roles were played by residents of Martha's Vineyard, where the film was shot. One example was Deputy Hendricks, played by future television producer Jeffrey Kramer.[25]The role of Brody was offered to Robert Duvall, but the actor was interested only in portraying Quint.[26] Charlton Heston expressed a desire for the role, but Spielberg felt that Heston would bring a screen persona too grand for the part of a police chief of a modest community.[27] Roy Scheider became interested in the project after overhearing Spielberg at a party talk with a screenwriter about having the shark jump up onto a boat.[13] Spielberg was initially apprehensive about hiring Scheider, fearing he would portray a "tough guy", similar to his role in The French Connection.[26]Nine days before the start of production, neither Quint nor Hooper had been cast.[28] The role of Quint was originally offered to actors Lee Marvin and Sterling Hayden, both of whom passed.[13][26] Zanuck and Brown had just finished working with Robert Shaw on The Sting, and suggested him to Spielberg.[29] Shaw was reluctant to take the role since he did not like the book, but decided to accept at the urging of both his wife, actress Mary Ure, and his secretary"The last time they were that enthusiastic was From Russia with Love. And they were right."[30] Shaw based his performance on fellow cast member Craig Kingsbury, a local fisherman, farmer, and legendary eccentric, who was playing fisherman Ben Gardner.[31] Spielberg described Kingsbury as "the purest version of who, in my mind, Quint was", and some of his offscreen utterances were incorporated into the script as lines of Gardner's and Quint's.[32]For the role of Hooper, Spielberg initially wanted Jon Voight.[29] Timothy Bottoms, Joel Grey, and Jeff Bridges were also considered for the part.[33] Spielberg's friend George Lucas suggested Richard Dreyfuss, whom he had directed in American Graffiti.[13] The actor initially passed, but changed his mind after he attended a pre-release screening of The Apprenticeship of Duddy Kravitz, which he had just completed. Disappointed in his performance and fearing that no one would want to hire him once Kravitz was released, he immediately called Spielberg and accepted the role in Jaws. Because the film the director envisioned was so dissimilar to Benchley's novel, Spielberg asked Dreyfuss not to read it.[34] As a result of the casting, Hooper was rewritten to better suit the actor,[28] as well as to be more representative of Spielberg, who came to view Dreyfuss as "my alter ego".[33]"We started the film without a script, without a cast and without a shark."Principal photography began May 2, 1974,[36] on the island of Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts, selected after consideration was given to eastern Long Island. Brown later explained that the production "needed a vacation area that was lower middle class enough so that an appearance of a shark would destroy the tourist business."[37] Martha's Vineyard was also chosen because the surrounding ocean had a sandy bottom that never dropped below 35 feet (11m) for 12 miles (19km) out from shore, helping the prop sharks to operate smoothly.[38] As Spielberg wanted to film the aquatic sequences relatively close-up to resemble what people see while swimming, cinematographer Bill Butler devised new equipment to facilitate marine and underwater shooting, including a rig to keep the camera stable regardless of tide and a sealed submersible camera box.[39] Spielberg asked the art department to avoid red in both scenery and wardrobe, so that the blood from the attacks would be the only red element and cause a bigger shock.[32]Three full-size pneumatically powered prop sharkswhich the film crew nicknamed "Bruce" after Spielberg's lawyer, Bruce Raimerwere made for the production:[41] a "sea-sled shark", a full-body prop with its belly missing that was towed with a 300-foot (roughly 100-m) line, and two "platform sharks", one that moved from camera-left to -right (with its hidden left side exposing an array of pneumatic hoses), and an opposite model with its right flank uncovered.[4] The sharks were designed by art director Joe Alves during the third quarter of 1973. Between November 1973 and April 1974, the sharks were fabricated at Rolly Harper's Motion Picture & Equipment Rental in Sun Valley, California. Their construction involved a team of as many as 40 effects technicians, supervised by renowned mechanical effects supervisor Bob Mattey, best known for creating the giant squid in 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea. After the sharks were completed, they were trucked to the shooting location.[42] In early July, the platform used to tow the two side-view sharks capsized as it was being lowered to the ocean floor, forcing a team of divers to retrieve it.[43] The model required 14 operators to control all of the moving parts.[34]The film had a troubled shoot and went far over budget. David Brown said that the budget "was $4million and the picture wound up costing $9million";[44] the effects outlays alone grew to $3 million due to the problems with the mechanical sharks.[45] Disgruntled crew members gave the film the nickname "Flaws".[34][41] Spielberg attributed many problems to his perfectionism and his inexperience. The former was epitomized by his insistence on shooting at sea with a life-sized shark; "I could have shot the movie in the tank or even in a protected lake somewhere, but it would not have looked the same," he said.[30] As for his lack of experience: "I was naive about the ocean, basically. I was pretty naive about mother nature and the hubris of a filmmaker who thinks he can conquer the elements was foolhardy, but I was too young to know I was being foolhardy when I demanded that we shoot the film in the Atlantic Ocean and not in a North Hollywood tank."[22]Shooting at sea led to many delays: unwanted sailboats drifted into frame, cameras got soaked,[32] and the Orca once began to sink with the actors on board.[46] The prop sharks frequently malfunctioned owing to a series of issues including bad weather, pneumatic hoses taking on salt water, frames fracturing due to water resistance, corroding skin, and electrolysis. From the first water test onward, the "non-absorbent" neoprene foam that made up the sharks' skin soaked up liquid, causing the sharks to balloon, and the sea-sled model frequently got entangled among forests of seaweed.[30][43] Spielberg later calculated that during the 12-hour daily work schedule, on average only four hours were actually spent filming.[47] Gottlieb was nearly decapitated by the boat's propellers, and Dreyfuss was almost imprisoned in the steel cage.[30] The actors were frequently seasick. Shaw also fled to Canada whenever he could due to tax problems,[48] engaged in binge drinking, and developed a grudge against Dreyfuss, who was getting rave reviews for his performance in Duddy Kravitz.[11] Editor Verna Fields rarely had material to work with during principal photography, as according to Spielberg "we would shoot five scenes in a good day, three in an average day, and none in a bad day."[49]The delays proved serendipitous in some regards. The script was refined during production, and the unreliable mechanical sharks forced Spielberg to shoot many scenes so that the shark was only hinted at. For example, for much of the shark hunt, its location is indicated by the floating yellow barrels.[50] The opening had the shark devouring Chrissie,[11] but it was rewritten so that it would be shot with Backlinie being dragged and yanked by cables to simulate an attack.[32] Spielberg also included multiple shots of just the dorsal fin. This forced restraint is widely thought to have added to the movie's suspense.[50] As Spielberg put it years later, "The film went from a Japanese Saturday matinee horror flick to more of a Hitchcock, the less-you-see-the-more-you-get thriller."[34] In another interview, he similarly declared, "The shark not working was a godsend. It made me become more like Alfred Hitchcock than like Ray Harryhausen." The acting became crucial for making audiences believe in such a big shark: "The more fake the shark looked in the water, the more my anxiety told me to heighten the naturalism of the performances."[22]Footage of real sharks was shot by Ron and Valerie Taylor in the waters off Australia, with a smaller-framed actor in a miniature shark cage to create the illusion that the sharks were enormous. During the Taylors' shoot, a great white attacked the boat and cage. The footage of the cage attack was so stunning that Spielberg was eager to incorporate it in the film. No one had been in the cage at the time, however, and the script, following the novel, originally had the shark killing Hooper in it. The storyline was consequently altered to have Hooper escape from the cage, which allowed the footage to be used.[51][52] As production executive Bill Gilmore put it, "The shark down in Australia rewrote the script and saved Dreyfuss's character."[53]Although principal photography was scheduled to take 55 days, it did not wrap until October 6, 1974, after 159 days.[34][36] Spielberg, reflecting on the protracted shoot, stated, "I thought my career as a filmmaker was over. I heard rumors ... that I would never work again because no one had ever taken a film 100 days over schedule."[34] Spielberg himself was not present for the shooting of the final scene in which the shark explodes, as he believed that the crew were planning to throw him in the water when the scene was done.[20] It has since become a tradition for Spielberg to be absent when the final scene of one of his films is being shot.[54] Afterward, underwater scenes were shot at the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer water tank in Culver City, with stuntmen Dick Warlock and Frank James Sparks as stand-ins for Dreyfuss in the scene where the shark attacks the cage,[55] as well as near Santa Catalina Island, California. Fields, who had completed a rough cut of the first two-thirds of the film, up until the shark hunt, finished the editing and reworked some of the material. According to Zanuck, "She actually came in and reconstructed some scenes that Steven had constructed for comedy and made them terrifying, and some scenes he shot to be terrifying and made them comedy scenes."[56] The ship used for the Orca was brought to Los Angeles so the sound effects team could record sounds for both the ship and the underwater scenes.[57]Two scenes were altered following test screenings. As the audience's screams had covered up Scheider's "bigger boat" one-liner, Brody's reaction after the shark jumps behind him was extended, and the volume of the line was raised.[58][59] Spielberg also decided that he was greedy for "one more scream", and reshot the scene in which Hooper discovers Ben Gardner's body, using $3,000 of his own money after Universal refused to pay for the reshoot. The underwater scene was shot in Fields's swimming pool in Encino, California,[60] using a lifecast latex model of Craig Kingsbury's head attached to a fake body, which was placed in the wrecked boat's hull.[32]John Williams composed the film's score, which earned him an Academy Award and was later ranked the sixth greatest score by the American Film Institute.[62][63] The main "shark" theme, a simple alternating pattern of two notesvariously identified as "E and F"[64] or "F and F sharp"[65]became a classic piece of suspense music, synonymous with approaching danger (see leading-tone). Williams described the theme as "grinding away at you, just as a shark would do, instinctual, relentless, unstoppable."[66] The piece was performed by tuba player Tommy Johnson. When asked by Johnson why the melody was written in such a high register and not played by the more appropriate French horn, Williams responded that he wanted it to sound "a little more threatening".[67] When Williams first demonstrated his idea to Spielberg, playing just the two notes on a piano, Spielberg was said to have laughed, thinking that it was a joke. As Williams saw similarities between Jaws and pirate movies, at other points in the score he evoked "pirate music", which he called "primal, but fun and entertaining".[61] Calling for rapid, percussive string playing, the score contains echoes as well of Igor Stravinsky's The Rite of Spring.[65][68]There are various interpretations of the meaning and effectiveness of the primary music theme, which is widely described as one of the most recognizable cinematic themes of all time.[69] Music scholar Joseph Cancellaro proposes that the two-note expression mimics the shark's heartbeat.[70] According to Alexandre Tylski, like themes Bernard Herrmann wrote for Taxi Driver, North by Northwest, and particularly Mysterious Island, it suggests human respiration. He further argues that the score's strongest motif is actually "the split, the rupture"when it dramatically cuts off, as after Chrissie's death.[65] The relationship between sound and silence is also taken advantage of in the way the audience is conditioned to associate the shark with its theme,[66] which is exploited toward the film's climax when the shark suddenly appears with no musical introduction.[69]Spielberg later said that without Williams's score the film would have been only half as successful, and according to Williams it jumpstarted his career.[61] He had previously scored Spielberg's debut feature, The Sugarland Express, and went on to collaborate with the director on almost all of his films.[66] The original soundtrack for Jaws was released by MCA Records in 1975, and as a CD in 1992, including roughly a half hour of music that Williams redid for the album.[71][72] In 2000, two versions of the score were released: Decca/Universal reissued the soundtrack album to coincide with the release of the 25th-anniversary DVD, featuring the entire 51 minutes of the original score,[71][72] and Varse Sarabande put out a rerecording of the score performed by the Royal Scottish National Orchestra, conducted by Joel McNeely.[73]Herman Melville's Moby-Dick is the most notable artistic antecedent to Jaws. The character of Quint strongly resembles Captain Ahab, the obsessed captain of the Pequod who devotes his life to hunting a sperm whale. Quint's monologue reveals a similar obsession with sharks; even his boat, the Orca, is named after the only natural enemy of the white shark. In the novel and original screenplay, Quint dies after being dragged under the ocean by a harpoon tied to his leg, similar to the death of Ahab in Melville's novel.[74] A direct reference to these similarities may be found in Spielberg's draft of the screenplay, which introduces Quint watching the film version of Moby-Dick; his continuous laughter prompts other audience members to get up and leave the theater (Wesley Strick's screenplay for the 1991 remake of Cape Fear features a similar scene). However, the scene from Moby-Dick could not be licensed from the film's star, Gregory Peck, its copyright holder.[3] Screenwriter Carl Gottlieb also drew comparisons to Ernest Hemingway's The Old Man and the Sea: "Jaws is ... a titanic struggle, like Melville or Hemingway."[21]The underwater scenes shot from the shark's point of view have been compared with passages in two 1950s horror films, The Creature from the Black Lagoon and The Monster That Challenged the World.[75][76] Gottlieb named two science fiction productions from the same era as influences on how the shark was depicted, or not: The Thing from Another World, which Gottlieb described as "a great horror film where you only see the monster in the last reel";[77] and It Came From Outer Space, where "the suspense was built up because the creature was always off-camera". Those precedents helped Spielberg and Gottlieb to "concentrate on showing the 'effects' of the shark rather than the shark itself".[17]Critics such as Neil Sinyard have noticed similarities to Henrik Ibsen's play An Enemy of the People.[78] Gottlieb himself said he and Spielberg referred to Jaws as "Moby-Dick meets Enemy of the People."[79] The Ibsen work features a doctor who discovers that a seaside town's medicinal hot springs, a major tourist attraction and revenue source, are contaminated. When the doctor attempts to convince the townspeople of the danger, he loses his job and is shunned. This plotline is paralleled in Jaws by Brody's conflict with Mayor Vaughn, who refuses to acknowledge the presence of a shark that may dissuade summer beachgoers from coming to Amity. Brody is vindicated when more shark attacks occur at the crowded beach in broad daylight. Sinyard calls the film a "deft combination of Watergate and Ibsen's play".[78]Jaws has received considerable attention from academic critics. Stephen Heath relates the film's ideological meanings to the then-recent Watergate scandal. He argues that Brody represents the "white male middle class[there is] not a single black and, very quickly, not a single woman in the film", who restores public order "with an ordinary-guy kind of heroism born of fear-and-decency".[80] Yet Heath moves beyond ideological content analysis to examine Jaws as a signal example of the film as "industrial product" that sells on the basis of "the pleasure of cinema, thus yielding the perpetuation of the industry (which is why part of the meaning of Jaws is to be the most profitable movie)".[81]Andrew Britton contrasts the film to the novel's post-Watergate cynicism, suggesting that its narrative alterations from the book (Hooper's survival, the shark's explosive death) help make it "a communal exorcism, a ceremony for the restoration of ideological confidence." He suggests that the experience of the film is "inconceivable" without the mass audience's jubilation when the shark is annihilated, signifying the obliteration of evil itself.[82] In his view, Brody serves to demonstrate that "individual action by the one just man is still a viable source for social change".[83] Peter Biskind argues that the film does maintain post-Watergate cynicism concerning politics and politicians insofar as the sole villain beside the shark is the town's venal mayor. Yet he observes that, far from the narrative formulas so often employed by New Hollywood filmmakers of the erainvolving Us vs. Them, hip counterculture figures vs. "The Man"the overarching conflict in Jaws does not pit the heroes against authority figures, but against a menace that targets everyone regardless of socioeconomic position.[84]Whereas Britton states that the film avoids the novel's theme of social class conflicts on Amity Island,[83] Biskind detects class divisions in the screen version and argues for their significance. "Authority must be restored," he writes, "but not by Quint". The seaman's "working class toughness and bourgeois independence is alien and frightening ... irrational and out of control". Hooper, meanwhile, is "associated with technology rather than experience, inherited wealth rather than self-made sufficiency"; he is marginalized from the conclusive action, if less terminally than Quint.[85] Britton sees the film more as concerned with the "vulnerability of children and the need to protect and guard them", which in turn helps generate a "pervasive sense of the supreme value of family life: a value clearly related to [ideological] stability and cultural continuity".[86]Fredric Jameson's Marxist analysis highlights the polysemy of the shark and the multiple ways in which it can be and has been readfrom representing alien menaces such as communism or the Third World to more intimate dreads concerning the unreality of contemporary American life and the vain efforts to sanitize and suppress the knowledge of death. He asserts that its symbolic function is to be found in this very "polysemousness which is profoundly ideological, insofar as it allows essentially social and historical anxieties to be folded back into apparently 'natural' ones ... to be recontained in what looks like a conflict with other forms of biological existence."[87] He views Quint's demise as the symbolic overthrow of an old, populist, New Deal America and Brody and Hooper's partnership as an "allegory of an alliance between the forces of law-and-order and the new technocracy of the multinational corporations ... in which the viewer rejoices without understanding that he or she is excluded from it."[88]Universal spent $1.8 million promoting Jaws, including an unprecedented $700,000 on national television spot advertising.[35][89] The media blitz saw around twenty-five thirty-second advertisements aired per night on prime-time network TV between June 18, 1975, and the film's opening two days later.[90] Beyond that, in the description of film industry scholar Searle Kochberg, Universal "devised and co-ordinated a highly innovative plan" for the picture's marketing.[90] As early as October 1974, Zanuck, Brown, and Benchley hit the television and radio talk show circuit to promote the paperback edition of the novel and the forthcoming film.[91] The studio and publisher Bantam agreed on a title logo that would appear on both the paperback and in all of the advertising for the movie.[90] The centerpieces of the joint promotion strategy were John Williams's theme and the poster image featuring the shark approaching a lone female swimmer.[45] The poster was based on the paperback's cover, and had the same artist, Bantam employee Roger Kastel.[92] The Seiniger Advertising agency spent six months designing the poster; principal Tony Seiniger explained that "no matter what we did, it didn't look scary enough". Seiniger ultimately decided that "you had to actually go underneath the shark so you could see his teeth."[93]More merchandise was created to take advantage of the film's release. In 1999, Graeme Turner wrote that Jaws was accompanied by what was still "probably the most elaborate array of tie-ins" of any film to date: "This included a sound-track album, T-shirts, plastic tumblers, a book about the making of the movie, the book the movie was based on, beach towels, blankets, shark costumes, toy sharks, hobby kits, iron-transfers, games, posters, shark's tooth necklaces, sleepwear, water pistols, and more."[94] The Ideal Toy Company, for instance, produced a game in which the player had to use a hook to fish out items from the shark's mouth before the jaws closed.[95]The glowing audience response to a rough cut of the film at two test screenings in Dallas on March 26, 1975, and one in Long Beach, on March 28, along with the success of Benchley's novel and the early stages of Universal's marketing campaign, generated great interest among theater owners, facilitating the studio's plan to debut Jaws at hundreds of cinemas simultaneously.[96][97] A third and final preview screening, of a cut incorporating changes inspired by the previous presentations, was held in Hollywood on April 24.[98] After Universal chairman Lew Wasserman attended one of the screenings, he ordered the film's initial releaseplanned for a massive total of as many as 900 theatersto be cut down, declaring, "I want this picture to run all summer long. I don't want people in Palm Springs to see the picture in Palm Springs. I want them to have to get in their cars and drive to see it in Hollywood."[99] Nonetheless, the several hundred theaters that were still booked for the opening represented what was then an unusually wide release. At the time, wide openings were associated with movies of doubtful quality; not uncommon on the exploitation side of the industry, they were customarily employed to diminish the effect of negative reviews and word of mouth. There had been some recent exceptions, precedents that included the rerelease of Billy Jack and the original release of its sequel The Trial of Billy Jack, the Dirty Harry sequel Magnum Force, and the latest installments in the James Bond series.[100][101] Still, the typical major studio film release at the time involved opening at a few big-city theaters, which allowed for a series of premieres. Distributors would then slowly forward prints to additional locales across the country, capitalizing on any positive critical or audience response. The outsized success of the The Godfather in 1972 had sparked a trend toward wider releases, but even that film had debuted in just five theaters, before going wide in its second weekend.[102]On June 20, Jaws opened across North America on 464 screens409 in the United States, the remainder in Canada.[103] The coupling of this broad distribution pattern with the movie's then even rarer national television marketing campaign yielded a release method virtually unheard-of at the time.[104] (A month earlier, Columbia Pictures had done something similar with a Charles Bronson thriller, Breakout, though that film's prospects for an extended run were much slimmer.)[105][106] Universal president Sid Sheinberg reasoned that nationwide marketing costs would be amortized at a more favorable rate per print relative to a slow, scaled release.[104][107][108] Building on the film's success, the release was subsequently expanded on July 25 to nearly 700 theaters, and on August 15 to more than 950.[109] Overseas distribution followed the same pattern, with intensive television campaigns and wide releasesin Great Britain, for instance, Jaws opened in December at more than 100 theaters.[110]Jaws opened with a $7 million weekend[111] and recouped its production costs in two weeks.[112] In just 78 days it overtook The Godfather as the highest-grossing film at the North American box office,[102] sailing past that picture's earnings of $86 million[113] to become the first film to reach $100 million in rentals.[114] Its initial release ultimately brought in $123.1 million in rentals.[112] Theatrical re-releases in 1976 and 1979 brought its total rentals to $133.4 million.[113]The picture entered overseas release in December 1975,[115] and its international business mirrored its domestic performance. It broke records in Singapore,[116] New Zealand, Japan,[117] Spain,[118] and Mexico.[119] By 1977, Jaws was the highest-grossing international release with worldwide rentals of $193 million, equating to about $400 million of gross revenue;[120] it supplanted The Godfather, which had earned $145 million in rentals.[121]Jaws was the highest-grossing film until Star Wars, which debuted two years later. Star Wars surpassed Jaws for the U.S. record six months after its release and set a new global record in 1978.[122][123] As of January 2012, it is the 116th-highest-grossing film of all time with $470.7 million worldwide,[124] and the 57th highest domestically with a total North American gross of $260 million.[111] Adjusted for inflation, Jaws has earned almost $2 billion worldwide at 2011 prices, and is the second most successful franchise film after Star Wars.[125] In North America, it is the seventh-highest-grossing movie of all time, with a total of $1.017 billion at current prices,[126] based on an estimated 128,078,800 tickets sold.[127] In the United Kingdom, it is the seventh-highest-grossing film to be released since 1975, earning the equivalent of over 70 million in 2009/10 currency,[128] with admissions estimated at 16.2 million.[129] Jaws has also sold 13 million tickets in Brazil, the second-highest attendance ever in the country behind Titanic.[130]On television, the American Broadcasting Company aired it for the first time right after its 1979 re-release.[131] The first U.S. broadcast attracted 57 percent of the total audience, the second highest televised movie share at the time behind Gone with the Wind.[132] In the United Kingdom, 23 million people watched its inaugural broadcast, the second biggest TV audience ever for a feature film behind Live and Let Die.[133]Jaws received critical acclaim.[134][135] Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times called it "a sensationally effective action picture, a scary thriller that works all the better because it's populated with characters that have been developed into human beings".[136] Variety's A.D. Murphy praised Spielberg's directorial skills, and called Robert Shaw's performance "absolutely magnificent".[137] According to The New Yorker's Pauline Kael, it was "the most cheerfully perverse scare movie ever made ... [with] more zest than an early Woody Allen picture, a lot more electricity, [and] it's funny in a Woody Allen sort of way".[138] For New Times magazine, Frank Rich wrote, "Spielberg is blessed with a talent that is absurdly absent from most American filmmakers these days: this man actually knows how to tell a story on screen. ... It speaks well of this director's gifts that some of the most frightening sequences in Jaws are those where we don't even see the shark."[139] Writing for New York magazine, Judith Crist described the film as "an exhilarating adventure entertainment of the highest order" and complimented its acting and "extraordinary technical achievements".[140] Rex Reed praised the "nerve-frying" action scenes and concluded that "for the most part, Jaws is a gripping horror film that works beautifully in every department".[141]The film was not without its detractors. Vincent Canby of The New York Times wrote, "It's a measure of how the film operates that not once do we feel particular sympathy for any of the shark's victims. ... In the best films, characters are revealed in terms of the action. In movies like Jaws, characters are simply functions of the action ... like stage hands who move props around and deliver information when it's necessary". He did, however, describe it as "the sort of nonsense that can be a good deal of fun".[142] Los Angeles Times critic Charles Champlin disagreed with the film's PG rating, saying that "Jaws is too gruesome for children, and likely to turn the stomach of the impressionable at any age. ... It is a coarse-grained and exploitative work which depends on excess for its impact. Ashore it is a bore, awkwardly staged and lumpily written."[143] Marcia Magill of Films in Review said that while Jaws "is eminently worth seeing for its second half", she felt that before the protagonists' pursuit of the shark the film was "often flawed by its busyness".[144] William S. Pechter of Commentary described Jaws as "a mind-numbing repast for sense-sated gluttons" and "filmmaking of this essentially manipulative sort"; Molly Haskell of The Village Voice similarly characterized it as a "scare machine that works with computer-like precision. ... You feel like a rat, being given shock therapy".[139] The most frequently criticized aspect of the film has been the artificiality of its mechanical antagonist: Magill declared that "the programmed shark has one truly phony close-up",[144] and in 2002, online reviewer James Berardinelli said that if not for Spielberg's deftly suspenseful direction, "we would be doubled over with laughter at the cheesiness of the animatronic creature."[69] Halliwell's Film Guide claimed "despite genuinely suspenseful and frightening sequences, it is a slackly narrated and sometimes flatly handled thriller with an over-abundance of dialogue and, when it finally appears, a pretty unconvincing monster."[145]Jaws won three Academy Awards for Best Film Editing, Best Original Dramatic Score, and Best Sound (Robert Hoyt, Roger Heman, Earl Madery and John Carter).[62][146] It was also nominated for Best Picture, losing to One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest.[147] Spielberg greatly resented the fact that he was not nominated for Best Director.[139] Along with the Oscar, John Williams's score won the Grammy Award,[148] the BAFTA Award for Best Film Music,[149] and the Golden Globe Award.[150] To her Academy Award, Verna Fields added the American Cinema Editors' Eddie Award for Best Edited Feature Film.[151]Jaws was chosen Favorite Movie at the People's Choice Awards.[152] It was also nominated for best Film, Director, Actor (Richard Dreyfuss), Editing, and Sound at the 29th British Academy Film Awards,[149] and Best FilmDrama, Director, and Screenplay at the 33rd Golden Globe Awards.[150] Spielberg was nominated by the Directors Guild of America for a DGA Award,[153] and the Writers Guild of America nominated Peter Benchley and Carl Gottlieb's script for Best Adapted Drama.[154]In the years since its release, Jaws has frequently been cited by film critics and industry professionals as one of the greatest movies of all time. It was number 48 on American Film Institute's 100 Years... 100 Movies, a list of the greatest American films of all time compiled in 1998; it dropped to number 56 on the 10 Year Anniversary list.[155][156] AFI also ranked the shark at number 18 on its list of the 50 Best Villains,[157] Roy Scheider's line "You're gonna need a bigger boat" 35th on a list of top 100 movie quotes,[158] Williams's score at sixth on a list of 100 Years of Film Scores,[63] and the film as second on a list of 100 most thrilling films, behind only Psycho.[159] In 2003, The New York Times included the film on its list of the best 1,000 movies ever made.[160] The following year, Jaws placed at the top of the Bravo network's five-hour miniseries The 100 Scariest Movie Moments.[161] The Chicago Film Critics Association named it the sixth scariest film ever made in 2006.[162] In 2008, Jaws was ranked the fifth greatest film in history by Empire magazine,[163] which also placed Quint at number 50 on its list of the 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time.[164] The film has been cited in many other lists of 50 and 100 greatest films, including ones compiled by Leonard Maltin,[165] Entertainment Weekly,[166] Film4,[167] Rolling Stone,[168] Total Film,[169] TV Guide,[170] and Vanity Fair.[171]In 2001, the United States Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry as a "culturally significant" motion picture.[172] In 2006, its screenplay was ranked the 63rd best of all time by the Writers Guild of America.[173]Jaws was key in establishing the benefits of a wide national release backed by heavy television advertising, rather than the traditional progressive release in which a film slowly entered new markets and built support over time.[90][102] Saturation booking, in which a film opens simultaneously at thousands of cinemas, and massive media buys are now commonplace for the major Hollywood studios.[174] According to Peter Biskind, Jaws "diminish[ed] the importance of print reviews, making it virtually impossible for a film to build slowly, finding its audience by dint of mere quality. ... Moreover, Jaws whet corporate appetites for big profits quickly, which is to say, studios wanted every film to be Jaws."[175] Scholar Thomas Schatz writes that it "recalibrated the profit potential of the Hollywood hit, and redefined its status as a marketable commodity and cultural phenomenon as well. The film brought an emphatic end to Hollywood's five-year recession, while ushering in an era of high-cost, high-tech, high-speed thrillers."[176]Jaws also played a major part in establishing summer as the prime season for the release of studios' biggest box-office contenders, their intended blockbusters;[102][177] winter had long been the time when most hoped-for hits were distributed, while summer was largely reserved for dumping films thought likely to be poor performers.[176] Jaws and Star Wars are regarded as marking the beginning of the new U.S. film industry business model dominated by "high-concept" pictureswith premises that can be easily described and marketedas well as the beginning of the end of the New Hollywood period, which saw auteur films increasingly disregarded in favor of profitable big-budget pictures.[102][178] The New Hollywood era was defined by the relative autonomy filmmakers were able to attain within the major studio system; in Biskind's description, "Spielberg was the Trojan horse through which the studios began to reassert their power."[175]The film had broader cultural repercussions, as well. Similar to the way the pivotal scene in 1960's Psycho made showers a new source of anxiety, Jaws led many viewers to fear going into the ocean.[179][180] Reduced beach attendance in 1975 was attributed to it,[181] as well as an increased number of reported shark sightings.[182] It is still seen as responsible for perpetuating negative stereotypes about sharks and their behavior,[183] and for producing the so-called "Jaws effect", which allegedly inspired "legions of fishermen [who] piled into boats and killed thousands of the ocean predators in shark-fishing tournaments."[184] Benchley stated that he would not have written the original novel had he known what sharks are really like in the wild.[185] Conservation groups have bemoaned the fact that the film has made it considerably harder to convince the public that sharks should be protected.[186]Jaws set the template for many subsequent horror films, to the extent that the script for Ridley Scott's 1979 science fiction film Alien was pitched to studio executives as "Jaws in space."[187][188] Many films based on man-eating animals, usually aquatic, were released through the 1970s and 1980s, such as Orca, Grizzly, Alligator, Day of the Animals, and Eaten Alive. Spielberg declared Piranha, directed by Joe Dante and written by John Sayles, "the best of the Jaws ripoffs".[147] Three mockbusters based on Jaws came from Italy: Great White,[189] which inspired a plagiarism lawsuit by Universal;[190] Monster Shark,[189] featured in Mystery Science Theater 3000 under the title Devil Fish;[191] and Cruel Jaws (aka Jaws 5: Cruel Jaws), which features footage from Jaws and Jaws 2.[192][193]Martha's Vineyard celebrated the film's 30th anniversary in 2005 with a "JawsFest" festival,[194] which is scheduled to have its second edition in 2012.[195] An independent group of fans produced the feature-length documentary The Shark is Still Working, featuring interviews with the film's cast and crew. Narrated by Roy Scheider and dedicated to Peter Benchley, who died in 2006, it debuted at the 2009 Los Angeles United Film Festival.[196][197]The first ever LaserDisc title marketed in North America was the MCA DiscoVision release of Jaws in 1978.[198] A second LaserDisc was released in 1992,[199] before a third and final version came out under MCA/Universal Home Video's Signature Collection imprint in 1995. This release was an elaborate boxset that included deleted scenes and outtakes, a new two-hour documentary on the making of the film directed and produced by Laurent Bouzereau, a copy of the novel Jaws, and a CD of John Williams's soundtrack.[200]MCA Home Video first released Jaws on VHS in 1980.[201][202] For the film's 20th anniversary in 1995, MCA Universal Home Video issued a new Collector's Edition tape featuring a making-of retrospective.[203] This release sold 800,000 units in North America.[204] Another, final VHS release, marking the film's 25th anniversary in 2000, came with a companion tape containing a documentary, deleted scenes, outtakes, and a trailer.[205]Jaws was first released on DVD in 2000 for the film's 25th anniversary, accompanied by a massive publicity campaign.[204] It featured a 50-minute documentary on the making of the film (an edited version of the one featured on the 1995 LaserDisc release), with interviews with Spielberg, Scheider, Dreyfuss, Benchley, and other cast and crew members. Other extras included deleted scenes, outtakes, trailers, production photos, and storyboards.[206] The DVD shipped one million copies in just one month.[207] In June 2005, a 30th-anniversary edition was released at the JawsFest festival in Martha's Vineyard.[194] The new DVD had many extras seen in previous home video releases, including the full two-hour Bouzereau documentary, and a previously unavailable interview with Spielberg conducted on the set of Jaws in 1974.[208] The film was released on Blu-ray August 14, 2012, with over four hours of extras, including The Shark Is Still Working.[209]Jaws spawned three sequels, none of which approached the success of the originalindeed, their combined domestic grosses amount to barely half of the first film's.[210] In October 1975, Spielberg declared to a film festival audience that "making a sequel to anything is just a cheap carny trick".[147] Nonetheless, he did consider taking on the first sequel when its original director, John D. Hancock, was fired a few days into the shoot; ultimately, his obligations to Close Encounters of the Third Kind, which he was working on with Dreyfuss, made it impossible.[211] Jaws 2 (1978) was eventually directed by Jeannot Szwarc; Scheider, Gary, Hamilton, and Jeffrey Kramer (who portrayed Deputy Hendricks) reprised their roles. It is generally regarded as the best of the sequels.[212] The next film, Jaws 3-D (1983), was directed by Joe Alves, who had served as art director and production designer, respectively, on the two preceding films.[213] Starring Dennis Quaid and Louis Gossett, Jr., it was released in the 3-D format, although the effect did not transfer to television or home video, where it was renamed Jaws 3.[214] Jaws: The Revenge (1987), directed by Joseph Sargent, starring Michael Caine, and featuring the return of Gary, is considered one of the worst movies ever made.[215][216] While all three sequels made a profit at the box office (Jaws 2 and Jaws 3-D were among the top 20 highest-grossing films of their respective years), critics and audiences alike were generally dissatisfied with the films.[217]The film has inspired two theme park rides: one at Universal Studios Florida,[218] which closed in January 2012,[219] and one at Universal Studios Japan.[220] There have been at least two musical adaptations: JAWS The Musical!, which premiered in 2004 at the Minnesota Fringe Festival, and Giant Killer Shark: The Musical, which premiered in 2006 at the Toronto Fringe Festival.[221] Three video games based on the film were released: 1987's Jaws, developed by LJN for the Nintendo Entertainment System;[222] 2006's Jaws Unleashed by Majesco Entertainment for the Xbox, PlayStation 2, and PC;[223] and 2011's Jaws: Ultimate Predator, also by Majesco, for the Nintendo 3DS and Wii.[224] A mobile game by Bytemark was released in 2010 for the iPhone.[225] Aristocrat made an officially licensed slot machine based on the movie.[226]Richard D. ZanuckDavid BrownPeter BenchleyCarl GottliebRoy ScheiderRobert ShawRichard DreyfussLorraine GaryMurray HamiltonJune 20, 1975(1975-06-20)1 Plot2 Production

2.1 Development
2.2 Writing
2.3 Casting
2.4 Filming
2.5 Music

2.1 Development2.2 Writing2.3 Casting2.4 Filming2.5 Music3 Inspirations and themes

3.1 Scholarly criticism

3.1 Scholarly criticism4 Release

4.1 Promotion
4.2 Theatrical run

4.1 Promotion4.2 Theatrical run5 Reception

5.1 Box office performance
5.2 Critical response
5.3 Accolades

5.1 Box office performance5.2 Critical response5.3 Accolades6 Legacy

6.1 Home video releases
6.2 Sequels
6.3 Adaptations and merchandise

6.1 Home video releases6.2 Sequels6.3 Adaptations and merchandise7 See also8 References9 Bibliography10 External links2.1 Development2.2 Writing2.3 Casting2.4 Filming2.5 Music3.1 Scholarly criticism4.1 Promotion4.2 Theatrical run5.1 Box office performance5.2 Critical response5.3 Accolades6.1 Home video releases6.2 Sequels6.3 Adaptations and merchandiseList of killer shark filmsMuir 2007, p.555Dinning, Mark. "Jaws 2". Empire. http://www.empireonline.com/reviews/reviewcomplete.asp?fid=133463. Retrieved 2012-01-05.Nunziata, Nick (2001-05-15). "Jaws 2  DVD Review". IGN. http://dvd.ign.com/articles/200/200170p1.html. Retrieved 2012-01-05."Jaws 3-D". Variety. 1983-01-01. http://www.variety.com/review/VE1117792125?refcatid=31. Retrieved 2006-11-28.Derek, Tse (2003-06-10). "Sequels we wish we'd missed". The London Free Press. http://www.canoe.ca/NewsStand/LondonFreePress/Today/2003/06/10/107674.html. Retrieved 2010-03-11.James, Caryn (1987-07-18). "Film: 'Jaws the Revenge,' The Fourth in the Series". The New York Times. http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9B0DEFDB133CF93BA25754C0A961948260. Retrieved 2007-06-01.Adamson, John E.; Morrison, Amanda (2011). Law for Business and Personal Use. Stamford, Connecticut: Cengage Learning. ISBN0-538-49690-8.Andrews, Nigel (1999). Nigel Andrews on Jaws. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN0-7475-3975-8.Baer, William (2008). Classic American Films: Conversations with the Screenwriters. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood. ISBN0-313-34898-7.Biskind, Peter (1998). Easy Riders, Raging Bulls. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN0-684-85708-1.Bowker's Complete Video Directory 1994. New York: R.R. Bowker. 1994. ISBN978-0-8352-3391-0.Britton, Andrew (1979). "Jaws". In Grant, Barry Keith. Britton on Film: The Complete Film Criticism of Andrew Britton. (2009). Detroit: Wayne State University Press. ISBN0-8143-3363-X.Brode, Douglas (1995). The Films of Steven Spielberg. New York: Carol Publishing. ISBN0-8065-1951-7.Brosnan, John (1978). Future Tense: The Cinema of Science Fiction. London: Macdonald and Jane's. ISBN0-354-04222-X.Burr, Ty (1999). The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time. New York: Entertainment Weekly Books. ISBN1-883013-68-2. http://www.filmsite.org/ew100.html.Cancellaro, Joseph (2006). Exploring Sound Design for Interactive Media. Florence, Kentucky: Delmar Learning. ISBN1-4018-8102-5.Collins, Jim; Radner, Hilary (1993). Film Theory Goes to the Movies. London: Routledge. ISBN0-415-90576-1.Friedman, Lester D. (2006). Citizen Spielberg. Champaign: University of Illinois Press. ISBN0-252-07358-4.Friedman, Lester D.; Notbohm, Brent (2000). Steven Spielberg: Interviews. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi. ISBN1-57806-113-X.Gordon, Andrew (2008). Empire of Dreams: The Science Fiction and Fantasy Films of Steven Spielberg. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN074255578.Gottlieb, Carl (2005). The Jaws Log. New York: Newmarket Press. ISBN0-571-20949-1.Hall, Sheldon; Neale, Stephen (2010). Epics, Spectacles, and Blockbusters: A Hollywood History. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. ISBN978-0-8143-3008-1.Heath, Stephen (1976). "Jaws, Ideology, and Film Theory". In Nichols, Bill. Movies and Methods: An Anthology, Volume II. (1985). Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN0-520-05408-3.Jackson, Kathi (2007). Steven Spielberg: A Biography. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood. ISBN0-313-33796-9.Jameson, Fredric (1979). "Reification and Utopia in Mass Culture". Signatures of the Visible. (1990). New York and London: Routledge. ISBN[[Special:BookSources/04159001115|04159001115]].Kael, Pauline (1976). "Notes on Evolving Heroes, Morals, Audiences". When the Lights Go Down. (1980). Beverly, Massachusetts: Wadsworth. ISBN0-03-056842-0.Kochberg, Searle (1996). "Institutions, Audiences and Technology". In Nelmes, Jill. An Introduction to Film Studies. London: Routledge. ISBN0-415-10860-8.Lemkin, Jonathan (1984). "Archetypal Landscapes and Jaws". In Grant, Barry Keith. Planks of Reason: Essays on the Horror Film. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. ISBN0-8108-2156-7.Maltin, Leonard (1999). "100 Must-See Films of the 20th Century". Leonard Maltin's Movie & Video Guide 2000. New York: Penguin Group. ISBN0-452-28123-7.Marich, Robert (2005). Marketing to Moviegoers: A Handbook of Strategies Used by Major Studios and Independents. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Focal Press. ISBN0-240-80687-5.Mast, Gerald; Kawin, Bruce F. (2003). A Short History of the Movies. Harlow, Essex: Longman. ISBN0-321-10603-2.McBride, Joseph (1999). Steven Spielberg: A Biography. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Da Capo Press. ISBN0-306-80900-1.Moritz, Charles (1978). Current Biography Yearbook 1978. New York: H. W. Wilson. ISBN[[Special:BookSources/9997377028|9997377028]].Morris, Nigel (2007). The Cinema of Steven Spielberg: Empire of Light. New York: Wallflower Press. ISBN1-904764-88-6.Muir, John Kenneth (2007). Horror Films of the 1970s, Volume 2. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland. ISBN0-7864-3104-0.Nadler, Holly (2006). Vineyard Confidential: 350 Years of Scandals, Eccentrics, and Strange Occurrences. Rockport, Maine: Down East Enterprise Inc. ISBN0-89272-687-3.Ochoa, George (2011). Deformed and Destructive Beings: The Purpose of Horror Films. McFarland. ISBN0-7864-6307-4.Paszylk, Bartomiej (2009). The Pleasure and Pain of Cult Horror Films: An Historical Survey. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland. ISBN0-7864-3695-6.Petersen, Clarence (1975). The Bantam Story: Thirty Years of Paperback Publishing. Bantam Books. OCLC1937339.Prigg, Steven (2004). Movie Moguls Speak: Interviews with Top Film Producers. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland. ISBN0-7864-1929-6.Scanlon, Jennifer (2009). Bad Girls Go Everywhere: The Life of Helen Gurley Brown. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN0-19-534205-4.Shone, Tom (2004). Blockbuster: How Hollywood Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Summer. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN0-7432-3568-1.Sinyard, Neil (1989). The Films of Steven Spielberg. London: Hamlyn Bison. ISBN0-600-55226-8.Siska, William Charles (1980). Toward a Semiotic Theory of Visual Communication in the Cinema. Manchester, New Hampshire: Ayer Publishing. ISBN0-405-12900-9.Stanley, John (1988). Revenge of the Creature Features Movie Guide: An A to Z Encyclopedia to the Cinema of the Fantastic, or, Is There a Mad Doctor in the House?. Pacifica, California: Creatures at Large Press. ISBN0-940064-08-1.Turner, Graeme (1999). Film as Social Practice. London: Routledge. ISBN0-415-21595-1.Wyatt, Justin (1994). High Concept: Movies and Marketing in Hollywood. Austin: University of Texas Press. ISBN0-292-79091-0.Wyatt, Justin (1998). "From Roadshowing to Saturation Release: Majors, Independents, and Marketing/Distribution Innovations". In Lewis, Jon. The New American Cinema. Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. ISBN0-8223-2115-7.Yewdall, David Lewis (2011). Practical Art of Motion Picture Sound. Waltham, Massachusetts: Focal Press. ISBN0-240-81240-9.Jaws at the Open Directory ProjectJaws at Filmsite.orgJaws at the Internet Movie DatabaseJaws at AllRoviJaws at Box Office MojoJaws at MetacriticJaws at Rotten TomatoesFilmportalHorror fictionportalSharksportalSnow White and the Seven Dwarfs is a 1937 American animated film produced by Walt Disney and released by RKO Radio Pictures. Based on the German fairy tale by the Brothers Grimm, it is the first full-length cel animated feature in motion picture history, the first animated feature film produced in the United States, the first produced in full color, the first to be produced by Walt Disney Productions, and the first in the Walt Disney Animated Classics series.[3] The story was adapted by storyboard artists Dorothy Ann Blank, Richard Creedon, Merrill De Maris, Otto Englander, Earl Hurd, Dick Rickard, Ted Sears and Webb Smith. David Hand was the supervising director, while William Cottrell, Wilfred Jackson, Larry Morey, Perce Pearce, and Ben Sharpsteen directed the film's individual sequences.Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs premiered at the Carthay Circle Theatre on December 21, 1937, followed by a nationwide release on February 4, 1938. It went on to gross a total of $8 million in international receipts in its opening release. The film was added to the United States National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" in 1989. It was one of two animated films to rank in the American Film Institute's list of the 100 greatest American films of all time in 1997 (the other being Disney's Fantasia), ranking number 49. It reached number 34 in the list's 2007 revision, this time being the only traditionally-animated film on the list. The AFI named the film as the greatest American animated film of all time in 2008.Through a textual prologue told via a storybook, Snow White is a princess living with her stepmother, a vain and wicked Queen who is assumed to have taken over the kingdom after the death of Snow White's father. Fearing Snow White's beauty surpassing her own, the Queen forced her to work as a scullery maid and asked her Magic Mirror daily "who is the fairest one of all". For several years the mirror always answered that the Queen was, pleasing her.At the film's opening, the Magic Mirror informs the Queen that Snow White is now the fairest in the land. The jealous Queen orders a reluctant huntsman to take Snow White into the woods and kill her. She further demands that the huntsman return with Snow White's heart in a jeweled box as proof of the deed. The huntsman encounters Snow White but decides not to harm her. He tearfully begs for her forgiveness, revealing the Queen wants her dead, and urges her to flee into the woods and never come back, bringing back a pig's heart instead.Lost and frightened, the princess is befriended by woodland creatures who lead her to a cottage deep in the woods. Finding seven small chairs in the cottage's dining room, Snow White assumes the cottage is the untidy home of seven orphaned children. It soon becomes apparent that the cottage belongs instead to seven adult dwarfs, Doc, Grumpy, Happy, Sleepy, Bashful, Sneezy, and Dopey, who work in a nearby mine. Returning home, they are alarmed to find their cottage clean and surmise that an intruder has invaded their home. The dwarfs find Snow White upstairs, asleep across three of their beds. Snow White awakes to find the Dwarfs at her bedside and introduces herself, and all of the dwarfs eventually welcome her into their home after they learn she can cook and clean beautifully. Snow White begins a new life cooking, cleaning, and keeping house for the dwarfs while they mine for jewels and at night sing, play music and dance.Meanwhile, the Queen discovers that Snow White is still alive when the mirror again answers that Snow White is the fairest in the land. Using magic to disguise herself as an old hag, the Queen creates a poisoned apple that will put whoever eats it into the "Sleeping Death". The Evil Queen explains that Snow White would collapse into a magical sleep if she were to take even a single bite of the apple. The sleep can only be cured by the power of "love's first kiss". The Queen reasons that this is no danger to her plans, as the dwarfs would not be able to awaken Snow White, and would think she was dead, thus resulting in Snow White being "buried alive". The Queen goes to the cottage while the dwarfs are away and tricks Snow White into biting into the poisoned apple. As Snow White falls asleep the Queen proclaims that she will be the fairest of the land. The vengeful dwarfs, alerted by the woodland animals who recognize her, chase the Queen up a cliff and trap her. She tries to roll a boulder over them but lightning strikes the cliff she is standing on, causing it to collapse. The Queen falls to her death, and her body is crushed by the boulder.The dwarfs return to their cottage and find Snow White seemingly dead, being kept in a deathlike slumber by the potion. Unwilling to bury her out of sight in the ground, they instead place her in a glass coffin trimmed with gold in a clearing in the forest. Together with the woodland creatures, they keep watch over her in an "eternal vigil". After some time, a prince, who had previously met and fallen in love with Snow White, learns of her eternal sleep and visits her coffin. Saddened by her apparent death, he kisses her, which breaks the spell and awakens her. The dwarfs and animals all rejoice as the Prince takes Snow White to his castle, which glows in the presence of Snow White.Development on Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs began in early 1934, and in June 1934, Walt Disney announced the production of his first feature to the New York Times.[5] Before Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, the Disney studio had been primarily involved in the production of animated short subjects in the Mickey Mouse and Silly Symphonies series. Disney hoped to expand his studio's prestige and revenues by moving into features,[6] and estimated that Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs could be produced for a budget of US$250,000;[5] this was ten times the budget of an average Silly Symphony.[5]Walt Disney had to fight to get the film produced. Both his brother and business partner Roy Disney and his wife Lillian attempted to talk him out of it,[6] and the Hollywood movie industry referred to the film derisively as "Disney's Folly" while it was in production. He even had to mortgage his house to help finance the film's production, which eventually ran up a total cost of $1,488,422.74, a massive sum for a feature film in 1937.[1]On August 9, 1934, twenty-one pages of notesentitled "Snowwhite suggestions"were compiled by staff writer Richard Creedon, suggesting the principal characters, as well as situations and 'gags' for the story. As Disney had stated at the very beginning of the project, the main attraction of the story for him was the Seven Dwarfs, and their possibilities for "screwiness" and "gags"; the three story meetings held in October and attended by Disney, Creedon, Larry Morey, Albert Hurter, Ted Sears and Pinto Colvig were dominated by such subjects. At this point, Disney felt that the story should begin with Snow White's discovery of the Cottage of the Seven Dwarfs.[5] Walt Disney had suggested from the beginning that each of the dwarfs, whose names and personalities are not stated in the original fairy tale, could have individual personalities. The dwarfs names were chosen from a pool of about fifty potentials, including Jumpy, Deafy, Dizzey, Hickey, Wheezy, Baldy, Gabby, Nifty, Sniffy, Swift, Lazy, Puffy, Stuffy, Tubby, Shorty and Burpy.[7] The seven finalists were chosen through a process of elimination. The leader of the dwarfs, required to be pompous, self-important and bumbling, was named Doc; others were named for their distinguishing character traits. At the end of the October story meetings, however, only Doc, Grumpy, Bashful, Sleepy and Happy of the final seven were named; at this point, Sneezy and Dopey were replaced by 'Jumpy' and an unnamed seventh dwarf.[1]Along with a focus on the characterisations and comedic possibilities of the dwarfs, Creedon's eighteen-page outline of the story written from the October meetings, featured a continuous flow of gags as well as the Queen's attempt to kill Snow White with a poisoned comb, an element taken from the Grimms' original story. After persuading Snow White to use the comb, the disguised Queen would have escaped alive, but the dwarfs would have arrived in time to remove it. After the failure of the comb, the Queen was to have the Prince captured and taken to her dungeon, where she would have come to him (story sketches show this event both with the Queen and the Witch) and used magic to bring the dungeon's skeletons to life, making them dance for him and identifying one skeleton as 'Prince Oswald' (an example of the more humorous atmosphere of this original story treatment[5]). It is written in story notes that the Queen has such magical power only in her own domain, the castle. With the Prince refusing to marry her, the Queen leaves him to his death (one sketch shows the Prince trapped in a subterranean chamber filling with water[8]) as she makes her way to the dwarfs' cottage with the poisoned apple. The forest animals were to help the Prince escape the Queen's minions and find his horse. The Prince was to ride to the cottage to save Snow White, but took the wrong road (despite warnings from the forest animals and his horse, whom he, unlike Snow White, could not understand). He therefore would not have arrived in time to save her from the Queen, but would have been able to save her with love's first kiss. This plot was not used in the final film, though many sketches of the scene in the dungeon were made by Ferdinand Hovarth.Other examples of the more comical nature of the story at this point include suggestions for gags with the Witch's warts[citation needed] and a 'fat, batty, cartoon type, self-satisfied' Queen.[5] The Prince was also more of a clown, and was to serenade Snow White in a more comical fashion. Walt Disney encouraged all staff at the studio to contribute to the story, offering five dollars for every 'gag'; such gags included the dwarfs' noses popping over the foot of the bed when they first meet Snow White.[9]Disney was concerned that such a comical approach would lessen the plausibility of the characters and, sensing that more time was needed for the development of the Queen, advised in an outline circulated on November 6 that attention be paid exclusively to "scenes in which only Snow White, the Dwarfs, and their bird and animal friends appear". The names and personalities of the dwarfs, however, were still "open to change". A meeting of November 16 resulted in another outline entitled 'Dwarfs Discover Snowwhite', which introduced the character of Dopey,[5] who would ultimately prove to be the most successful and popular of the dwarf characterisations.[7] For the rest of 1934 Disney further developed the story by himself, finding a dilemma in the characterisation of the Queen, who he felt could no longer be 'fat' and 'batty', but a 'stately beautiful type' (a possibility already brought up in previous story meetings). Disney did not focus on the project again until the autumn of 1935; it is thought that he may have doubted his, and his studio's, ability, and that his trip to Europe that summer restored his confidence. At this point Disney and his writers focused on the scenes in which Snow White and the dwarfs are introduced to the audience and each other. He laid out the likely assignments for everyone working on the film in a memorandum of November 25, 1935, and had decided on the personalities of the individual dwarfs.[5]It had first been thought that the dwarfs would be the main focus of the story, and many sequences were written for the seven characters. However, at a certain point, it was decided that the main thrust of the story was provided by the relationship between the Queen and Snow White.[9] For this reason, several sequences featuring the dwarfs were cut from the film. The first, which was animated in its entirety before being cut, showed Doc and Grumpy arguing about whether Snow White should stay with them. Another, also completely animated, would have shown the dwarfs eating soup noisily and messily; Snow White (unsuccessfully) attempts to teach them how to eat 'like gentlemen'. A partially animated sequence involved the dwarfs holding a "lodge meeting" in which they try to think of a gift for Snow White; this was to be followed by the elaborate 'bed building sequence', in which the dwarfs and the forest animals construct and carve a bed for the princess. This also was cut, as it was thought to slow down the movement of the story.[9] The soup-eating and bed-building sequences were animated by Ward Kimball, who was sufficiently discouraged by their removal to consider leaving the studio, however Disney persuaded him to stay by promoting him to supervising animator of Jimminy Cricket in his next feature Pinocchio.[10]The primary authority on the design of the film was concept artist Albert Hurter. All designs used in the film, from characters' appearances to the look of the rocks in the background, had to meet Hurter's approval before being finalised.[8] Two other concept artists contributed to the visual style of Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs: Ferdinand Hovarth (whose designs were often thought not to be as easily translated into animation as Hurter's, but who produced a number of dark concepts for the film) and Gustaf Tenggren, whose style borrowed from the likes of Arthur Rackham and John Bauer, and thus possessed the European illustration quality that Walt Disney was interested in. Tenggren was used primarily as a color stylist and to determine the staging and atmosphere of many of the scenes in the film. He also designed the posters for the film and illustrated the press book. However, only Hurter receives a credit for the film, as a character designer. Other artists to work on the film included Joe Grant, whose most significant contribution was the design for the Queen's Witch form.[8]Don Graham really knew what he was teaching, and he "showed" you how to do something he didn't just talk. He taught us things that were very important for animation. How to simplify our drawings how to cut out all the unnecessary hen scratching amateurs have a habit of using. He showed us how to make a drawing look solid. He taught us about tension points like a bent knee, and how the pant leg comes down from that knee and how important the wrinkles from it are to describe form. I learned a hell of a lot from him!Art Babbit, an animator who joined the Disney studio in 1932, invited seven of his colleagues (who worked in the same room as him) to come with him to an art class that he himself had set up at his home in the Hollywood Hills. Though there was no teacher, Babbit had recruited a model to pose for him and his fellow animators as they drew. These "classes" were held weekly; each week, more animators would come. After three weeks, Walt Disney called Babbit to his office and offered to provide the supplies, working space and models required if the sessions were moved to the studio. Babbit ran the sessions for a month until animator Hardie Gramatky suggested that they recruit Don Graham; the art teacher from the Chouinard Institute taught his first class at the studio on 15 November 1932, and was joined by Phil Dike a few weeks later.[5] These classes were principally concerned with human anatomy and movement, though instruction later included action analysis, animal anatomy and acting.[11]The first duty of the cartoon is not to picture or duplicate real action or things as they actually happen, but to give a character life and action; to picture on the screen things that have run through the imagination of the audience and to bring to life dream-fantasies and imaginative fancies that we have all thought of during our lives or have had pictured to us in various forms during our lives... I definitely feel that we cannot do the fantastic things based on the real, unless we first know the real. This point should be brought out very clearly to all new men, and even the older men.Though the classes were originally described as a "brutal battle", with neither instructor nor students well-versed in the other's craft,[5] the enthusiasm and energy of both parties made the classes stimulating and beneficial for all involved. Graham often screened Disney shorts and, along with the animators, provided critique featuring both strengths and weaknesses. For example, Graham criticised Babbit's animation of Abner the mouse in The Country Cousin as "taking a few of the obvious actions of a drunk without coordinating the rest of the body", while praising it for maintaining its humour without getting "dirty or mean or vulgar. The country mouse is always having a good time".[11]Very few of the animators at the Disney studio had had artistic training (most had been newspaper cartoonists); among these few was Grim Natwick, who had trained in Europe. The animator's success in designing and animating Betty Boop for Fleischer Studios showed an understanding of human female anatomy, and when Walt Disney hired Natwick he was given female characters to animate almost exclusively. Attempts to animate Persephone, the female lead of The Goddess of Spring, had proved largely unsuccessful; Natwick's animation of the heroine in Cookie Carnival showed greater promise, and the animator was eventually given the task of animating Snow White herself. Though live action footage of Snow White, the Prince and the Queen was shot as reference for the animators, the artists animators disapproved of rotoscoping, considering it to hinder the production of effective caricature. None of Babbit's animation of the Queen was rotoscoped;[12] despite Graham and Natwick's objections, however, some scenes of Snow White and the Prince were directly traced from the live-action footage.[11]The songs in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs were composed by Frank Churchill and Larry Morey. Paul J. Smith and Leigh Harline composed the incidental music score. Well-known songs from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs include "Heigh-Ho", "Some Day My Prince Will Come", and "Whistle While You Work". Because Disney did not have its own music publishing company at this time, the publishing rights for the music and songs were administered through Bourne Co. Music Publishers, which continues to hold these rights. In later years, the studio was able to acquire back the rights to the music from many of the other films, but not Snow White. Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs became the first American film to have a soundtrack album, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, released in conjunction with the feature film. Prior to Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, a movie soundtrack recording was unheard of and of little value to a movie studio.At this time, Disney also encouraged his staff to see a variety of films. These ranged from the mainstream, such as MGM's Romeo and Juliet (to which Disney made direct reference in a story meeting pertaining to the scene in which Snow White lies in her glass coffin), to the more obscure, including European silent cinema. The influence of German expressionism (examples of which exist in Nosferatu and The Cabinet of Dr. Calligari, both of which were recommended by Disney to his staff) can be found in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (as well as the two films to follow it), particularly in the scenes of Snow White fleeing through the forest and the Queen's transformation into the Witch. The latter was also inspired by 1931's Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, to which Disney made specific reference in story meetings.[11]Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs premiered at the Carthay Circle Theatre on December 21, 1937, to a wildly receptive audience, many of whom were the same naysayers who dubbed the film "Disney's Folly".[1] The film received a standing ovation at its completion from a star-studded audience that included such celebrities as Charlie Chaplin and Paulette Goddard, Shirley Temple, Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks, Jr., Judy Garland, Ginger Rogers, Jack Benny, Fred MacMurray, Clark Gable and Carole Lombard, Burns and Allen, Ed Sullivan, Milton Berle, John Barrymore, and Marlene Dietrich. Six days later, Walt Disney and the seven dwarfs appeared on the cover of Time magazine. The New York Times said "Thank you very much, Mr. Disney".Following successful exclusive runs at Radio City Music Hall in New York City and a theater in Miami in January 1938,[1] RKO Radio Pictures put the film into general release on February 4. It went on to become a major box-office success, making four times more money than any other motion picture released in 1938.[13] In its original release, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs grossed $3.5 million in the United States and Canada,[14] and by May 1939 its total international gross of $6.5 million made it the most successful sound film of all time, displacing Al Jolson's The Singing Fool (1928) (Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was later displaced from this position by Gone with the Wind in 1940).[14][15] By the end of its original run, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs had earned $7,846,000 in international box office receipts.[16] This earned RKO a profit of $380,000.[17]Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was first re-released in 1944, in order to raise revenue for the Disney studio during the World War II period. This re-release set a tradition of re-releasing Disney animated features every seven to ten years, and Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was re-released to theaters in 1952, 1958, 1967, 1975, 1983, 1987 and 1993. Coinciding with the fiftieth anniversary release in 1987, Disney released an authorized novelization of the story, written by children's author Suzanne Weyn.In 1993, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs became the first film to be entirely scanned to digital files, manipulated, and recorded back to film. The restoration project was carried out entirely at 4K resolution[clarification needed] and 10-bit color depth using the Cineon system to digitally remove dirt and scratches and restore faded colors.[18]Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs has had a lifetime gross of $416 million across its original release and several reissues.[2] Adjusted for inflation, and incorporating subsequent releases, the film still registers one of the top ten American film moneymakers of all time.[19]The film won an Academy Honorary Award for Walt Disney "as a significant screen innovation which has charmed millions and pioneered a great new entertainment field". Disney received a full-size Oscar statuette and seven miniature ones, presented to him by 10-year-old child actress Shirley Temple. The film was also nominated for Best Musical Score. "Some Day My Prince Will Come" has become a jazz standard that has been performed by numerous artists, including Buddy Rich, Lee Wiley, Oscar Peterson, and Miles Davis.Noted filmmakers such as Sergei Eisenstein and Charlie Chaplin praised Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs as a notable achievement in cinema; Eisenstein went so far as to call it the greatest film ever made.[20] The film inspired Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to produce its own fantasy film, The Wizard of Oz, in 1939. Another animation pioneer, Max Fleischer, decided to produce his animated feature film Gulliver's Travels in order to compete with Snow White. The 1941 parody Ball of Fire featured a nightclub singer disrupting the lives of seven scholars (and Gary Cooper) while hiding from the police. The 1943 Merrie Melodies short Coal Black and de Sebben Dwarfs, directed by Bob Clampett, parodies Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs by presenting the story with an all-black cast singing a jazz score.Snow White's success led to Disney moving ahead with more feature-film productions. Walt Disney used much of the profits from Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs to finance a new $4.5 million studio in Burbank  the location on which The Walt Disney Studios is located to this day.[13] Within two years, the studio completed Pinocchio and Fantasia, and had begun production on features such as Dumbo, Bambi, Alice in Wonderland and Peter Pan.[5]On October 28, 1994, the film was released as the first video in the Walt Disney Masterpiece Collection. It was the last of the early Disney animated films to be released on home video.Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released on DVD on October 9, 2001, the first in Disney's Platinum Editions, and featured, across two discs, the digitally restored film, a making-of documentary narrated by Angela Lansbury, an audio commentary by John Canemaker and (via archived audio clips) Walt Disney, and many more special features.Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released on Blu-ray Disc on October 6, 2009, the first of Disney's Diamond Editions, and a new DVD edition was released on November 24, 2009. The Blu-ray includes a high-definition version of the movie sourced from a new restoration by Lowry Digital, a DVD copy of the film, and several bonus features not included on the 2001 DVD. This set returned to the Disney Vault on April 30, 2011.[21]The film also finally made its world television premiere in February 2010 on Disney corporate sibling ABC Family.Snow White's Scary Adventures is a popular theme park ride at Disneyland (an opening day attraction dating from 1955),[22] Walt Disney World's Magic Kingdom,[23] Tokyo Disneyland,[24] and Disneyland Paris.[25] Snow White, her Prince, the Queen (both in the form of a regent and a hag), and the Seven Dwarfs are also featured in parades and character appearances throughout the parks. Fantasyland at Walt Disney World is currently undergoing an expansion due to end in 2013. The Snow White's Scary Adventures ride will be closing and replaced with Princess Fairytale Hall, where Snow White and other princesses will be located for a meet and greet. Also included in the 2013 expansion of Fantasyland is the Seven Dwarfs Mine Train roller coaster.[26]The first attempt at a Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs video game was for the Atari 2600 as part of Atari's line of children's games.[27] It was never officially released, although a "homebrew" version was made available on a limited basis.[28]Walt Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released for the Game Boy Color system in 2001.Snow White also makes an appearance in the PlayStation 2 game Kingdom Hearts as one of the seven fabled Princesses of Heart.[29] A world based on the movie, Dwarf Woodlands, appears in Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep for the PSP.A comic book version was also published around the release of the film. It was more loyal to the original script, where the prince had a bigger role, while parts of Snow White's dress were green.Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs premiered on October 18, 1979, at the Radio City Music Hall, and closed on November 18, 1979. It reopened on January 11, 1980, and closed after 106 performances on March 9, 1980.Streaming audio December 21, 1937(1937-12-21) (premiere)February 4, 1938(1938-02-04) (United States)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Story development
3.2 Design
3.3 Music
3.4 Cinematic influences

3.1 Story development3.2 Design3.3 Music3.4 Cinematic influences4 Release

4.1 Original theatrical run
4.2 Re-releases
4.3 Critical reception
4.4 Home media

4.1 Original theatrical run4.2 Re-releases4.3 Critical reception4.4 Home media5 Media

5.1 Theme parks
5.2 Video games
5.3 Comics
5.4 Musical
5.5 Other appearances

5.1 Theme parks5.2 Video games5.3 Comics5.4 Musical5.5 Other appearances6 See also7 References8 External links3.1 Story development3.2 Design3.3 Music3.4 Cinematic influences4.1 Original theatrical run4.2 Re-releases4.3 Critical reception4.4 Home media5.1 Theme parks5.2 Video games5.3 Comics5.4 Musical5.5 Other appearancesAdriana Caselotti as Snow White: Snow White is a young princess. She is the daughter of a great king whose wife died when the daughter was very young. Her wicked stepmother has forced her to work as a scullery maid in the castle. Despite this, she retains a cheerful but nave demeanor.Lucille La Verne as Queen Grimhilde: The Queen is the stepmother of Snow White. Once her magic mirror tells her that Snow White is fairer than she is, she immediately enlists Humbert the huntsman to kill her in the woods. After she discovers that Snow White did not die, she disguises herself as an old hag and uses a poisoned apple to remove Snow White from her path without killing her.Harry Stockwell as The Prince: The prince first sees Snow White singing at her wishing well. He immediately falls in love with her and her voice. He later reappears to revive her.Roy Atwell as Doc: The leader of the seven dwarfs, Doc wears glasses and often mixes up his words.Pinto Colvig as Grumpy: Grumpy initially disapproves of Snow White's presence in the dwarfs' home, but later warns her of the threat posed by the Queen and rushes to her aid upon realizing that she is in danger, leading the charge himself. He has the biggest nose of the dwarfs, and is frequently seen with one eye shut.Otis Harlan as Happy: Happy is the joyous dwarf and is usually portrayed laughing.Pinto Colvig as Sleepy: Sleepy is always tired and appears laconic in most situations.Scotty Mattraw as Bashful: Bashful is the shyest of the dwarfs, and is often embarrassed by the presence of any attention directed at him.Billy Gilbert as Sneezy:[4] Sneezy's name is earned by his extraordinarily powerful sneezes (caused by hay fever), which are seen blowing even the heaviest of objects across a room.Eddie Collins as Dopey (vocal effects and live-action reference only):[4] Dopey is the only dwarf that does not have a beard. He is clumsy and mute, with Happy explaining that he has simply "never tried to speak".Moroni Olsen as The Magic Mirror: The Slave of the Magic Mirror appears as a green mask in clouds of smoke. The Queen regularly asks him who is the fairest in the land.Stuart Buchanan as Humbert the Huntsman: Despite his status as the Queen's assassin, the Huntsman cannot bear to kill Snow White, even when the Queen orders him to take the princess's heart.AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #49AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

The Queen - #10 Villain

The Queen - #10 VillainAFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs:

"Someday My Prince Will Come" - #19
"Whistle While You Work" - Nominated

"Someday My Prince Will Come" - #19"Whistle While You Work" - NominatedAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Magic Mirror on the wall, who is the fairest one of all?" - Nominated

"Magic Mirror on the wall, who is the fairest one of all?" - NominatedAFI's Greatest Movie Musicals - NominatedAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #34AFI's 10 Top 10 - #1 Animated filmThe Queen - #10 Villain"Someday My Prince Will Come" - #19"Whistle While You Work" - Nominated"Magic Mirror on the wall, who is the fairest one of all?" - NominatedThe wartime short Seven Wise Dwarfs, also produced by Disney, features the seven dwarfs. It doesn't have much new footage, as it is mainly made up of footage from this 1937 film and also the short "The Thrifty Pig". However it does have a short section in the middle which is new footage of the dwarves.Many episodes from House of Mouse feature the characters, but notably Pluto Saves The Day, Mickey's Magical Christmas: Snowed in at the House of Mouse, Clarabelle's Big Secret, Not So Goofy, Donald's Pumbaa Prank and Mickey and Minnie's Big Vacation feature them in speaking roles.The characters of Snow White, the Evil Queen and Grumpy appear as regular characters in the live action TV series Once Upon A Time. The other dwarves and The Huntsman appear as minor characters.The dwarves make a cameo appearance in the short The Standard Parade.List of animated feature-length filmsWilhelm, Henry Gilmer; Brower, Carol (1993). The Permanence and Care of Color Photographs: Traditional and Digital Color Prints, Color Negatives, Slides, and Motion Pictures. Preservation Pub. p.359. ISBN978-0911515008. "In only 2 months after the 1987 re-release, the film grossed another $45 milliongiving it a total gross to date of about $375 million! (Online copy at Google Books)""Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs". The Numbers. Nash Information Services. http://www.the-numbers.com/movies/1937/0SWSD.php. Retrieved July 5, 2011. "1993 release: $41,316,184"Official websiteWalt's Masterworks: Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs at Disney.comSnow White and the Seven Dwarfs at the Internet Movie DatabaseSnow White and the Seven Dwarfs at AllRoviSnow White and the Seven Dwarfs at Box Office MojoSnow White and the Seven Dwarfs at Rotten TomatoesSnow White on Lux Radio Theater: December 26, 1938. Guest appearance by Walt Disney.Snow White on Screen Guild Theater: December 23, 1946Intolerance is a 1916 American silent film directed by D. W. Griffith and is considered one of the great masterpieces of the Silent Era.[2] The three-and-a-half hour epic intercuts four parallel storylines each separated by several centuries: (1) A contemporary melodrama of crime and redemption; (2) a Judean story: Christs mission and death; (3) a French story: the events surrounding the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre of 1572; and (4) a Babylonian story: the fall of the Babylonian Empire to Persia in 539 BC.Intolerance was made partly in response to criticism of Griffith's previous film, The Birth of a Nation (1915),[3] which was attacked by the NAACP and other groups as perpetuating racial stereotypes and glorifying the Ku Klux Klan.[4]This complex film consists of four distinct, but parallel, storiesintercut with increasing frequency as the film builds to a climaxthat demonstrate mankind's persistent intolerance throughout the ages. The film sets up moral and psychological connections among the different stories. The timeline covers approximately 2,500 years:Breaks between the differing time-periods are marked by the symbolic image of a mother rocking a cradle, representing the passing of generations. One of the unusual characteristics of the film is that many of the characters don't have names. Griffith wished them to be emblematic of human types. Thus, the central female character in the modern story is called The Dear One. Her young husband is called The Boy, and the leader of the local Mafia is called The Musketeer of the Slums. Critics and film theorists indicate these names show Griffith's sentimentalism, which was already hinted at in The Birth of a Nation, with names such as The Little Colonel.In order of appearance:Uncredited extras:Intolerance was a colossal undertaking featuring monumental sets, lavish period costumes, and more than 3,000 extras. Griffith began shooting the film with the Modern Story (originally titled "The Mother and the Law"), whose planning predated The Birth of a Nation, then greatly expanded it to include the other three parallel stories under the theme of intolerance.Actual costs to produce Intolerance are unknown, but best estimates are close to $2 million (about $46 million today), an astronomical sum in 1916. The film was by far the most expensive made at that point. When the film became a flop at the box-office, the burden was so great that in 1918 Triangle Film Corporation was put up for sale.A detailed account of the films production is told in William M. Drew's 1986 book D.W. Griffith's Intolerance: Its Genesis and Its Vision.[9]Upon its initial release, Intolerance was a commercial failure. Intolerance has been called "the only film fugue".[10][11][12] Professor Theodore Huff, one of the leading film critics of the first half of the 20th century, stated that it was the only motion picture worthy of taking its place alongside Beethoven's Fifth Symphony, the masterpieces of Michelangelo, etc. as a separate work of art.[10]The film was shown out of competition at the 1982 Cannes Film Festival.[13]In 1989, Intolerance was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant," going in during the first year of voting.In 2007, AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) ranked Intolerance at number 49 of 100 films. The film currently holds a 96% approval rating on the aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes.Film critic David Thomson has written of the film's "self-destructive frenzy":The cross-cutting, self-interrupting format is wearisome.... The sheer pretension is a roadblock, and one longs for the "Modern Story" to hold the screen.... [That story] is still very exciting in terms of its cross-cutting in the attempt to save the boy from the gallows. This episode is what Griffith did best: brilliant, modern suspense, geared up to rapidity  whenever Griffith let himself slow down he was yielding to bathos.... Anyone concerned with film history has to see Intolerance, and pass on.[14]Intolerance and its unorthodox editing were enormously influential, particularly among European and Soviet filmmakers. Many of the numerous assistant directors Griffith employed in making the film  Erich von Stroheim, Tod Browning, Woody Van Dyke  went on to become important and noted Hollywood directors in the subsequent years.The pictured set was featured in the video game LA Noire as a historical monument and as a major scene in two of the cases in the game.A replica of an archway from the Babylon segment of the film serves as an important architectural element of the Hollywood and Highland shopping center in Los Angeles (built in 2001).Intolerance is now in the public domain and there are currently four major versions of the film in circulation.WARK PRODUCING CORPORATION, moving pictures, at 1,476
Broadway, has filed schedules in bankruptcy, with liabilities of $298,910,
unsecured claims and assets of $125,042, consisting of films, pictures,
prints, &c., $65,000; accounts $13,927 and deposits in banks $47,016.
Copyright on motion picture play, "Intolerance," is given as value unknown.
Among the creditors are D. W. Griffith, $84,334; D. W. Griffith, Inc. $975;
D. W. G. Corp., $60,230; H. E. Aitken, $8,136, and Norman Hall, $6,610.There are other budget/public domain video and Digital Video Disc versions of this film released by different companies, each with varying degrees of picture quality depending on the source that was used. A majority of these released are of poor picture quality, but even the restored 35 millimeter versions exhibit considerable film damage.The Internet Movie Database lists the standard running time as 163 minutes, which is the running length of the DVD released by "Public Domain Flicks". The Delta DVD released in Region 1 as Intolerance: A Sun Play of the Ages and in Region 2 as Intolerance: Love's Struggle Throughout the Ages clocks in at 167 minutes. The version available for free viewing on the Internet Movie Archive is listed as 176 minutes, and is presumably the Killiam restoration.Cameraman Karl Brown remembered a scene with the various members of the Babylonian harem that featured full frontal nudity. He was barred from the set that day, apparently because he was so young. While there are several shots of slaves and harem girls throughout the film (which were shot by another director, without Griffith's involvement) the scene that Brown describes is not in any surviving versions.[16]September 5, 1916(1916-09-05)1 Storylines2 Cast3 Production4 Reception5 Influence6 Extant versions

6.1 Major versions
6.2 Other versions
6.3 Lost footage

6.1 Major versions6.2 Other versions6.3 Lost footage7 References8 External links6.1 Major versions6.2 Other versions6.3 Lost footageLillian Gish ... Eternal MotherhoodVera Lewis ... Mary T. JenkinsMae Marsh ... The Dear OneFred Turner ... The Dear One's father, a worker at the Jenkins MillRobert Harron ... The BoyErich von Stroheim ... A PhariseeGnther von Ritzau ... A PhariseeFrank Bennett ... King Charles IX of FranceMaxfield Stanley ... Monsieur La France, Duc d'Anjou, Charles' younger brotherJosephine Crowell ... Catherine de Medici, the Queen-motherJoseph Henabery ... Admiral ColignyConstance Talmadge ... Marguerite of ValoisW.E. Lawrence ... Henry of NavarreMargery Wilson ... Brown EyesEugene Pallette ... Prosper LatourA.D. Sears ... A MercenarySam de Grasse ... Mr. Jenkins, mill bossConstance Talmadge ... The Mountain Girl (second role in film)Elmer Clifton ... The Rhapsode, a warrior-singerTully Marshall ... High Priest of Bel-MardukThe Ruth St. Denis Dancers[5]... Dancing girlsAlfred Paget ... Prince BelshazzarCarl Stockdale ... King Nabonidus, father of BelshazzarElmo Lincoln ... The Mighty Man of Valor, guard to BelshazzarSeena Owen ... The Princess Beloved, favorite of BelshazzarArthur Meyer ... The Mountain Girl's brotherLawrence Lawlor ... Judge (Babylonian Story)Miriam Cooper ... The Friendless One, former neighbor of the Boy and Dear OneWalter Long ... Musketeer of the SlumsMartin Landry ... AuctioneerBessie Love ... The BrideGeorge Walsh ... The BridegroomHoward Gaye ... The NazareneLillian Langdon ... Mary, the MotherRuth Handford ... Brown Eyes' motherSpottiswoode Aitken ... Brown Eyes' fatherGeorge Siegmann ... Cyrus the GreatMax Davidson,[6] tenement neighbor of Dear One? ... EgibiDouglas Fairbanks ... Drunken Soldier with monkey (uncredited extra)? ... Nevers? ... Tavannes? ... Retz? ... BiragueLloyd Ingraham ... Judge (Modern Story)Barney Bernard ... The Boy's AttorneyTom Wilson ... The Kindly Officer (Kindly Heart)Ralph Lewis ... The GovernorMonte Blue[6]Frank BorzageTod BrowningFrank BrownleeKate Bruce[6]Frank CampeauJewel CarmenDark CloudGino Corrado[6]Constance CollierVirginia Lee CorbinWilliam CourtrightNigel De BrulierCarol DempsterEdward DillonGeorge Fawcett[6]Olga GreyMildred HarrisDeWolf Hopper Sr.Jennie Lee[6]Harold LockwoodWilfred LucasFrancis McDonaldOwen MooreCarmel MyersLoyola O'ConnorVester PeggBilly QuirkWallace ReidAlma RubensTed Shawn[7]Pauline StarkeEve SouthernMadame Sul-Te-WanNatalie TalmadgeEthel Grey TerryKing Vidor[8]Winifred WestoverTammany YoungFrank BrunerThe Killiam Shows Version: This version, taken from a third-generation 16 millimeter print, contains an organ score by Gaylord Carter. Running approx. 176 minutes, this is the version that has been the most widely seen in recent years. It has been released on LaserDisc and DVD by Image Entertainment. This is the most complete version currently available on home video, if not the longest. Image Entertainment currently also has out a 197 minute version.The Official Thames Silents Restoration: In 1989, this film was given a formal restoration by film preservationists Kevin Brownlow and David Gill. This version, also running 197 minutes, was prepared by Thames Television from original 35 millimeter material, and its tones and tints restored per Griffith's original intent. (The Internet Movie Database states this version is 177 minutes). It also has a digitally recorded orchestral score by Carl Davis. This version was released in the U.S. briefly around 1989-1990 by HBO Video, then went out of print. This version is under copyright by the Rohauer Collection, who worked in association with Thames on the restoration.The Kino Version: Pieced together in 2002 by Kino International, this version, taken from better 35 millimeter material, is transferred at a slower frame rate than the Killiam Shows print, resulting in a longer running time of 197 minutes. It contains a synth orchestral score by Joseph Turrin. An alternate "happy ending" to the "Fall of Babylon" sequence, showing the Mountain Girl surviving and re-united with the Rhapsode, is included on the DVD as a supplement. While not as complete as the Killiam Shows Version, this print contains footage not found on any other home video release.The Restored Digital Cinema Version: Restoration conducted by ZZ Productions in collaboration with the Danish Film Institute and Arte France of the version shown on 7 April 1917 at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane in London. This version runs approximately 177 minutes and premiered 29 August 2007 at the Venice Film Festival and on 4 October on arte.[15]Intolerance at the Internet Movie DatabaseIntolerance at SilentEraIntolerance at AllRoviIntolerance is available for free download at the Internet Archive [more]Detailed plot summary and discussion of the film at Filmsite.orgPeriod poster of the film at the Criterion Theatre, Bridgeton, New JerseyButch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid is a 1969 American Western film directed by George Roy Hill and written by William Goldman (who won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay for the film). Based loosely on fact, the film tells the story of Wild West outlaws Robert LeRoy Parker, known to history as Butch Cassidy (Paul Newman) and his partner Harry Longabaugh, the "Sundance Kid" (Robert Redford) as they migrate to Bolivia while on the run from the law in search of a more successful criminal career. In 2003, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".In late 1890s Wyoming, Butch Cassidy (Paul Newman) is the affable, clever, talkative leader of the outlaw Hole in the Wall Gang. His closest companion is the laconic dead-shot "Sundance Kid" (Robert Redford). The two return to their hideout at Hole-in-the-Wall to discover that the rest of the gang, irked at Butch's long absences, have selected Harvey Logan (Ted Cassidy) as their new leader. Harvey challenges Butch to a knife fight over the gang's leadership. Butch defeats him using trickery, but embraces his idea to rob the Union Pacific Overland Flyer train on both its eastward and westward runs, agreeing that the second robbery would be unexpected and likely reap even more money than the first.The first robbery goes well. To celebrate, Butch and Sundance visit a favorite brothel in a nearby town and watch, amused, as the town sheriff (Kenneth Mars) unsuccessfully attempts to organize a posse to track down the gang. They then visit Sundance's lover, schoolteacher Etta Place (Katharine Ross). On the second train robbery, Butch uses too much dynamite to blow open the safe, blowing up the baggage car. As the gang scrambles to gather up the money, a second train arrives carrying a six-man team of lawmen.The robbers scatter but the posse heads after Butch and Sundance, who unsuccessfully try to hide out in the brothel and to seek amnesty from the friendly Sheriff Bledsoe (Jeff Corey). As the posse remains in pursuit despite all attempts to elude them, Butch and Sundance determine that the group includes renowned Indian tracker "Lord Baltimore" and relentless lawman Joe LeFors, recognizable by his white skimmer. Butch and Sundance finally elude their pursuers by jumping from a cliff into a river far below. They learn from Etta that the posse has been paid by Union Pacific head E. H. Harriman to remain on their trail until Butch and Sundance are both killed.Butch persuades Sundance and Etta that the three should escape to Bolivia, which Butch envisions as a robber's paradise. On their arrival there, a dismayed Sundance regards the country with contempt while Butch remains optimistic. They soon discover that they know too little Spanish to pull off a bank robbery, so Etta attempts to teach them the language. With her as an accomplice, they become successful bank robbers known as Los Bandidos Yanquis. However, their confidence drops when they see a man wearing a white skimmer and fear that Harriman's posse is still after them.Butch suggests "going straight", and he and Sundance land their first honest job as payroll guards for a mining company. However, they are ambushed by local bandits on their first run and their boss, Percy Garris (Strother Martin), is killed. Butch and Sundance ambush and kill the bandits, the first time Butch has ever shot someone. Concluding that the straight life isn't for them, they return to robbery, but Etta decides to return to the United States.Butch and Sundance steal a payroll and the mules carrying it, and arrive in a small town. A boy recognizes the mules' brand and alerts the local police, leading to a gunfight with the outlaws. They take cover in a building, but are both seriously wounded when Butch has to make a run to the mules for more ammunition. As dozens of Bolivian soldiers surround the area, Butch suggests the duo's next destination should be Australia. The film ends with a freeze frame shot on the pair charging out of the building, guns blazing, as the Bolivian forces fire repeatedly on them.The film was originally rated M (for mature audiences) by the Motion Picture Association of America. It was re-rated PG when 20th Century Fox re-released the film in 1974.The world premiere of the movie was in September 1969, at the Roger Sherman Theater, in New Haven, Connecticut. The premiere was attended by Paul Newman, Joanne Woodward, Robert Redford, George Roy Hill, William Goldman, and John Forman, among others.[5]According to the supplemental material on the Blu-ray disc release, William Goldman's script, originally called The Sundance Kid and Butch Cassidy, was purchased by Richard Zanuck at 20th Century Fox for $400,000, double the price the studio's board of directors had authorized.[citation needed] The title roles were originally cast with Newman and Steve McQueen, but the latter left after a dispute over billing. The role of Sundance was then offered to Jack Lemmon, whose production company, JML, had produced the 1967 film Cool Hand Luke starring Newman.[citation needed]. Lemmon, however, turned down the role; he did not like riding horses, and he also felt he had already played too many aspects of the Sundance Kid's character before.[6] Warren Beatty was then considered, as was Marlon Brando, but the role of Sundance eventually went to the lesser-known Redford. (Initially Newman was to play Sundance and Redford Cassidy.) Fox did not want Redford, but director George Roy Hill insisted. Redford later said this film catapulted him to stardom and irreversibly changed his career.Butch Cassidy's outlaw gang was actually called "The Wild Bunch"; this was changed, in the film, to "The Hole-In-The-Wall Gang" to avoid confusion with Sam Peckinpah's recently released film The Wild Bunch.[citation needed]The response of major American movie reviewers was widely favorable. Rotten Tomatoes, a film review aggregator counted 89% of critical reviews as favorable, giving it a "certified fresh" rating.[7] Newman's and Redford's chemistry was praised as was the film's charm and humor.Time magazine said the film's two male stars are "afflicted with cinematic schizophrenia. One moment they are sinewy, battered remnants of a discarded tradition. The next they are low comedians whose chaffing relationshipand dialoguecould have been lifted from a Batman and Robin episode."[8] Time also criticized the film's score as absurd and anachronistic.Roger Ebert did not like it. "The movie starts promisingly... a scene where Butch puts down a rebellion in his gang [is] one of the best things in the movie... And then we meet Sundance's girlfriend, played by Katharine Ross, and the scenes with the three of them have you thinking you've wandered into a really first-rate film." But after Harriman hires his posse, he has nothing good to say about it. "Hill apparently spent a lot of money to take his company on location for these scenes, and I guess when he got back to Hollywood he couldn't bear to edit them out of the final version. So the Super-posse chases our heroes unceasingly, until we've long since forgotten how well the movie started." The dialogue in the final scenes is "so bad we can't believe a word anyone says. And then the violent, bloody ending is also a mistake; apparently it was a misguided attempt to copy "Bonnie and Clyde...." we don't believe it, and we walk out of the theater wondering what happened to that great movie we were seeing until an hour ago."[9]With US box office of over US$100 million,[10] it was the top grossing film of the year. Adjusted for inflation, Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid ranks among the 100 top-grossing movies of all time and the top 10 for its decade, due in part to subsequent re-releases.The film won four Academy Awards: Best Cinematography; Best Original Score for a Motion Picture (not a Musical); Best Music, Song (Burt Bacharach and Hal David for "Raindrops Keep Fallin' on My Head"); and Best Writing, Story and Screenplay Based on Material Not Previously Published or Produced. It was also nominated for Best Director, Best Picture, and Best Sound (William Edmondson and David Dockendorf).[11]Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid also won numerous British Academy Film Awards, including Best Film, Best Direction, Best Screenplay, Best Cinematography, Best Actor (won by Redford though Newman was also nominated), and Best Actress for Katharine Ross, among others.William Goldman won the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Original Screenplay.In 2003, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".The film inspired the television series Alias Smith and Jones, starring Pete Duel and Ben Murphy as outlaws trying to earn an amnesty.[12] It has also been spoofed in films such as Shanghai Noon.[13]In the 2011 movie Blackthorn, Sam Shepard plays an elderly Butch Cassidy who has survived and eluded capture by living under the name James Blackthorn in a secluded Bolivian village. Tired of his long exile from the US and hoping to see his family again before he dies, Cassidy sets out on the long journey home.[14]A parody titled "Botch Casually and the Somedunce Kid" was published in MAD. It was illustrated by Mort Drucker and written by Arnie Kogen in issue No. 136, July 1970.[15]September 23, 1969(1969-09-23)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception

4.1 Critical response
4.2 Box office
4.3 Awards and nominations

4.1 Critical response4.2 Box office4.3 Awards and nominations5 Legacy6 References7 External links4.1 Critical response4.2 Box office4.3 Awards and nominationsPaul Newman as Butch CassidyRobert Redford as The Sundance KidKatharine Ross as Etta PlaceStrother Martin as Percy GarrisHenry Jones as Bike SalesmanJeff Corey as Sheriff BledsoeGeorge Furth as WoodcockCloris Leachman as AgnesTed Cassidy as Harvey LoganKenneth Mars as MarshalDonnelly Rhodes as MaconJody Gilbert as Large Woman Train PassengerTimothy Scott as News CarverDon Keefer as FiremanCharles Dierkop as Flat Nose CurryPancho Crdova as Bank ManagerNelson Olmsted as PhotographerPaul Bryar as Card Player No. 1Sam Elliott as Card Player No. 2Charles Akins as Bank TellerEric Sinclair as Tiffany's SalesmanDouglas Bank as CitizenLarry Barton as CitizenRico Cattani as Bank GuardJos Chvez as Bolivian Police CommanderDave Dunlop as GunmanJill Hall as Minor RolePercy Helton as SweetfaceBuck Holland as Posse MemberJack Isbell as PossemanEnrique Lucero as Guard in the 1st Bolivian BankThurl Ravenscroft as (singing voice)Jorge Russek as Bolivian Army OfficerJos Torvay as Bolivian BanditButch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid at the Internet Movie DatabaseTen Things You Didn't Know About Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid from the American Movie Classics "Future of Classic" blogButch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid at Virtual HistoryThe Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring is a 2001 epic[3][4] fantasy film[5] directed by Peter Jackson based on the first volume of J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings (19541955). It was followed by The Two Towers (2002) and The Return of the King (2003), based on the second and third volumes of The Lord of the Rings.Set in Middle-earth, the story tells of the Dark Lord Sauron, who is seeking the One Ring. The Ring has found its way to the young hobbit Frodo Baggins (Elijah Wood). The fate of Middle-earth hangs in the balance as Frodo and eight companions who form the Fellowship of the Ring begin their journey to Mount Doom in the land of Mordor, the only place where the Ring can be destroyed.Released on 10 December 2001, the film was highly acclaimed by critics and fans alike, especially as many of the latter judged it to be the most sufficiently faithful adaptation of the original story out of Jackson's film trilogy. It was a major box office success, earning over $870million worldwide, and the second highest-grossing film of 2001 in the U.S. and worldwide (behind Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone) which made it the fifth highest-grossing film ever at the time.As of 2012[update], it is the 28th highest-grossing worldwide film of all time. It won four Academy Awards and five BAFTAs, including Best Film and Best Director BAFTA awards. The Special Extended Edition was released to DVD on 12 November 2002 and to Blu-ray on 28 June 2011. In 2007, The Fellowship of the Ring was voted number 50 on the American Film Institute's list of 100 greatest American films. The AFI also voted it the second greatest fantasy film of all time during their AFI's 10 Top 10 special.In the Second Age, the Dark Lord Sauron attempts to conquer Middle-Earth using his One Ring. In battle against the Elves and Men, Prince Isildur cuts the Ring from Sauron's hand, destroying his physical form and vanquishing his army. However, Sauron's "life force" is bound to the Ring, allowing him to survive while the Ring remains. Isildur, corrupted by the Ring's power, refuses to destroy it. When Isildur is killed by Orcs, the Ring is lost in a river for 2,500 years. The Ring is found by Gollum, who possesses it for centuries until it is found by the Hobbit Bilbo Baggins.Sixty years later, Bilbo leaves the Ring to his nephew, Frodo Baggins. Upon learning that the Ring belonged to Sauron, the Wizard Gandalf the Grey warns Frodo that Sauron's forces will come for him. Gandalf catches Frodo's gardener Samwise Gamgee "eavesdropping" underneath a window and sends him with Frodo to leave the Shire. Gandalf rides to Isengard to meet with the head of his order, Saruman the White, who reveals that Sauron's servants, the Nazgl, have been sent to capture the Ring. Saruman reveals himself to be in service to Sauron, and imprisons Gandalf atop his tower. Saruman commands Sauron's Orcs to construct weapons of war and produce a new breed of Orc fighters: the Uruk-hai.While travelling to Bree, Frodo and Sam are joined by Merry and Pippin, and are nearly captured by the Nazgl. At the Inn of the Prancing Pony, Frodo meets the mysterious ranger Aragorn, who hides them from their pursuers and agrees to lead them to Rivendell. During the journey they are attacked by the Nazgl. Aragorn fights off the creatures, but Frodo is wounded by their Morgul blade, which will turn him into a wraith. While chased by the Nazgl, Frodo is saved by the Elf Arwen who uses her magic to summon a surge of water that sweeps away the pursuing Nazgl. Arwen takes Frodo to Rivendell where he is healed by her father, Elrond. Gandalf escapes Saruman's tower with the aid of Gwaihir the eagle and travels to Rivendell. Elrond calls a council of the races still loyal to Middle-earth to decide what should be done with the Ring. It is revealed that the Ring can only be destroyed by throwing it into the fires of Mount Doom, where it was forged. Frodo volunteers to take the Ring, accompanied by Sam, Merry, Pippin, Gandalf, and Aragorn. They are joined by the Elf Legolas, the Dwarf Gimli, and Boromir, man of Gondor, to form the Fellowship of the Ring.The Fellowship set out but are hindered by Saruman's magic. They travel through the dwarf Mines of Moria. Inside, they find that Orcs have overrun the mines and slain the Dwarves; they also realise that Gollum is following them, determined to reclaim the Ring. The Fellowship is attacked by Orcs and a Balrog, an ancient demon of fire and shadow. Gandalf confronts the Balrog, allowing the others to escape, but both Gandalf and the Balrog fall into an abyss. Mourning Gandalf's apparent death, the group flees to Lothlrien, where they are sheltered by its rulers, the Elves Galadriel and Celeborn. That night, Galadriel informs Frodo that it is his destiny to destroy the Ring. The Fellowship continue their journey. Meanwhile, Saruman assembles a force of Uruk-hai to hunt the Fellowship.After arriving at Parth Galen, Boromir gives in to the Ring's corruption and tries to take it from Frodo, believing that it is the only way to save his realm. Frodo manages to escape by wearing the Ring and becoming invisible. Boromir realises what he has done, and attempts to find Frodo, who decides to continue his journey alone, heeding Galadriel's warning that the Ring will eventually corrupt the other members of the Fellowship. The Uruk-hai arrive and Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli attempt to hold them off while Frodo escapes. Merry and Pippin lead the Orcs away from Frodo and are nearly killed. Boromir tries to save them, but in the process is shot fatally by the Uruk-Hai leader, Lurtz. The Uruk-Hai capture Merry and Pippin. Aragorn slays Lurtz and tends to a dying Boromir, and promises him that the world of men will not fall. Boromir dies with Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas by his side.Sam finds Frodo, who reluctantly lets Sam join him. Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli set out to rescue Merry and Pippin. As Frodo and Sam gaze out at the land before them, they grieve over the others. Frodo says that he is glad that Sam is with him and the two Hobbits set off towards Mordor.Before filming began on 11 October 1999, the principal actors trained for six weeks in sword fighting (with Bob Anderson), riding and boating. Jackson hoped such activities would allow the cast to bond so chemistry would be evident on screen as well as getting them used to life in Wellington.[6] They were also trained to pronounce Tolkien's verses properly.[7] After the shoot, the nine cast members playing the Fellowship got a tattoo, the Elvish symbol for the number nine, with the exception of John Rhys-Davies, whose stunt double got the tattoo instead.[8] The film is noted for having an ensemble cast,[9] and some of the cast and their respective characters include:The cast also includes: Sala Baker as the Dark Lord Sauron manifest as an Eye after the destruction of his physical form; Marton Csokas as the Elf Celeborn, co-ruler of Lothlrien; Lawrence Makoare as the Orc Lurtz, commander of Saruman's Orc forces; Craig Parker as Haldir, Leader of The Galadhrim warriors guarding the border of Lothlrien; Mark Ferguson as Gil-galad, an Elven-King and last ruler of Noldor; Peter McKenzie as Elendil, High King of Arnor and Gondor; and Harry Sinclair as Isildur, Elendil's son and Aragorn's ancestor who originally defeated Sauron.Jackson, Walsh and Boyens made numerous changes to the story, for purposes of pacing and character development. Jackson said his main desire was to make a film focused primarily on Frodo and the Ring, the "backbone" of the story.[20] The prologue condenses Tolkien's backstory, in which The Last Alliance's seven-year siege of the Barad-dr is a single battle, where Sauron is shown to explode, though Tolkien only said his spirit flees.[21]Events at the beginning of the film are condensed or omitted altogether. In the book the time between Gandalf leaving the Ring to Frodo and returning to reveal its inscription, which is 17 years, is compressed for timing reasons.[22] Frodo also spends a few months preparing to move to Buckland, on the eastern border of the shire. This move is omitted and combined with him setting out for Rivendell. Also compressed is the time between Frodo and Sam leaving Bag End and their meeting Merry and Pippin. Characters such as Tom Bombadil are left out to simplify the plot and increase the threat of the Ringwraiths. Such sequences are left out to make time to introduce Saruman, who in the book doesn't appear until a flashback told at the Council of Elrond. Saruman's role is enhanced: he is to blame for the blizzard on Caradhras, a role taken from Sauron and/or Caradhras itself in the book. Gandalf's capture by Saruman is also expanded with a fight sequence.The role of Barliman Butterbur at the Prancing Pony is largely removed for time and dramatic flow.The events at Weathertop were also altered. The location of the fight against the Ringwraiths was changed to the ruins on top of the hill rather than a campsite at its base. When Frodo was stabbed in the book, the party spent two weeks travelling to Rivendell, but in the film this is shortened to less than a week, with Frodo's condition worsening at a commensurately greater rate. Arwen was given a greater role in the film, accompanying Frodo all the way to Rivendell, while in the book Frodo faced the Ringwraiths alone at the Ford of Bruinen. The character of Glorfindel was omitted entirely and his scenes were also given to Arwen. She was tacitly credited with the river rising against the Ringwraiths, which was the work of her father Elrond with aid from Gandalf in the book.A significant new addition is Aragorn's self-doubt, which causes him to hesitate to claim the kingship of Gondor. This element is not present in the book, where Aragorn intends to claim the throne at an appropriate time. In the book Narsil is reforged immediately when he joins the Fellowship, but this event is held over until Return of the King in film to symbolically coincide with his acceptance of his title. These elements were added because Peter Jackson believed that each character should be forced to grow or change over the course of the story.Elrond's character gained an adversarial edge; he expresses doubts in the strength of Men to resist Sauron's evil after Isildur's failure to destroy the ring as depicted in the prologue. Jackson also shortens the Council of Elrond by spreading its exposition into earlier parts of the film. Elrond's counsellor, Erestorwho suggested the Ring be given to Tom Bombadilwas completely absent from this scene. Gimli's father, Glin, was also deemed unnecessary.The tone of the Moria sequence was altered. Although in the book the Fellowship only realises the Dwarves are all dead once they reach Balin's tomb, the filmmakers chose to use foreshadowing devices instead. Gandalf says to Gimli he would prefer not to enter Moria, and Saruman is shown to be aware of Gandalf's reticence, and also reveals an illustration of the Balrog in one of his books. The corpses of the dwarves are instantly shown as the Fellowship enter Moria.[23]In terms of dramatic structure, the book simply ends; there is no climax, because Tolkien wrote the "trilogy" as a single story published in three volumes. Jackson's version incorporates the first chapter of '"The Two Towers" and makes its events, told in real time instead of flashback, simultaneous with the Breaking of the Fellowship. This finale is played as a climactic battle, into which he introduces the Uruk-hai referred to as Lurtz in the script. In the book, Boromir is unable to tell Aragorn which hobbits were kidnapped by the orcs before he dies. From there, Aragorn deduces Frodo's intentions when he notices that a boat is missing and Sam's pack is gone. In the film, Aragorn and Frodo have a scene together in which Frodo's intentions are explicitly stated.Peter Jackson began working with Christian Rivers to storyboard the trilogy in August 1997, as well as getting Richard Taylor and Weta Workshop to begin creating his interpretation of Middle-earth.[24] Jackson told them to make Middle-earth as plausible and believable as possible, to think of Middle-earth in a historical manner.[25]In November[25], Alan Lee and John Howe became the primary conceptual designers for the film trilogy, having had previous experience as illustrators for the book and various other tie-ins. Lee worked for the Art Department creating places such as Rivendell, Isengard, Moria and Lothlrien, giving art nouveau and geometry influences to the Elves and Dwarves respectively.[25][26] Though Howe contributed with Bag End and the Argonath,[25][26] he focused working on armour having studied it all his life.[27] Weta and the Art Department continued to design, with Grant Major turning the Art Department's designs into architecture, and Dan Hennah scouting locations.[25] On 1 April 1999, Ngila Dickson joined the crew as costume designer. She and 40 seamstresses would create 19,000 costumes, 40 per version for the actor and their doubles, ageing and wearing them out for impression of age.[17]A list of filming locations, sorted by appearance order in the film:The Fellowship of the Ring makes extensive use of digital, practical and make-up special effects throughout. One noticeable illusion that appears in almost every scene involves setting a proper scale so that the characters are all the correct height. Elijah Wood, who plays Frodo, is 5ft 6in (1.68m) tall in real life, but the character of Frodo Baggins is barely four feet in height. Many different tricks were used to depict the hobbits (and Gimli the Dwarf) as being of diminutive stature. (In a happy coincidence, John-Rhys Davies who played Gimli is as tall compared to the Hobbit actors as his character needed to be compared to theirs, so he did not need to be filmed separately as a third variation of height, and is quite taller than Orlando Bloom, who played Legolas.) Large and small scale doubles were used in certain scenes, while entire duplicates of certain sets (including Bag End in Hobbiton) were built at two different scales, so that the characters would appear to be the appropriate size. At one point in the film, Frodo runs along a corridor in Bag End, followed by Gandalf. Elijah Wood and Ian McKellen were filmed in separate versions of the same corridor, built at two different scales, and a fast camera pan conceals the edit between the two. Forced perspective was also employed, so that it would look as though the short Hobbits were interacting with taller Men and Elves. Even the simple use of kneeling down, to the filmmakers' surprise, turned out to be an effective method in creating the illusion.For the battle between the Last Alliance and the forces of Sauron that begins the film, an elaborate CGI animation system, called MASSIVE, was developed by Stephen Regelous; it allowed thousands of individual animated "characters" in the program to act independently. This helped give the illusion of realism to the battle sequences. The "Making of" Lord of the Rings DVD reports some interesting initial problems: in the first execution of a battle between groups of characters, the wrong groups attacked each other. In another early demo, some of the warriors at the edge of the field could be seen running away. They were initially moving in the wrong direction, and had been programmed to keep running until they encountered an enemy.The digital creatures were important due to Jackson's requirement of biological plausibility. Their surface was scanned from large maquettes before numerous digital details of their skeletons and muscles were added. In the case of the Balrog, Gary Horsfield created a system that copied recorded imagery of fire.The musical score for the Lord of the Rings films was composed by Howard Shore. It was performed by the New Zealand Symphony Orchestra, The London Philharmonic Orchestra, The London Voices, and featured several vocal soloists. Two original songs, "Anron", and the end title theme "May It Be", were composed and sung by Enya, who allowed her label, Reprise Records, to release the soundtrack to this and its two sequels. In addition to this, Shore composed "In Dreams", which was sung by Edward Ross of the London Oratory School Schola.The Fellowship of the Ring was released on 19 December 2001 in 3,359 cinemas where it grossed $47.2 million on its opening weekend. It went on to make $314.7 million in North America and $555.9 million in the rest of the world for a worldwide total of $870.7 million.[28]The Fellowship of the Ring received mostly positive reviews from major film critics and was one of the best reviewed films of 2001, receiving 92% positive reviews on Rotten Tomatoes.[29] Roger Ebert gave the film three out of four stars and wrote, "Peter Jackson ... has made a work for, and of, our times. It will be embraced, I suspect, by many Tolkien fans and take on aspects of a cult. It is a candidate for many Oscars. It is an awesome production in its daring and breadth, and there are small touches that are just right".[30] USA Today also gave the film three out of four stars and wrote, "this movie version of a beloved book should please devotees as well as the uninitiated".[31] In his review for The New York Times, Elvis Mitchell wrote, "The playful spookiness of Mr. Jackson's direction provides a lively, light touch, a gesture that doesn't normally come to mind when Tolkien's name is mentioned".[32] Entertainment Weekly magazine gave the film an "A" rating and Lisa Schwarzbaum wrote, "The cast take to their roles with becoming modesty, certainly, but Jackson also makes it easy for them: His Fellowship flows, never lingering for the sake of admiring its own beauty ... Every detail of which engrossed me. I may have never turned a page of Tolkien, but I know enchantment when I see it".[33]In her review for The Washington Post, Rita Kempley praised the cast, in particular, "Mortensen, as Strider, is a revelation, not to mention downright gorgeous. And McKellen, carrying the burden of thousands of years' worth of the fight against evil, is positively Merlinesque".[34] Time magazine's Richard Corliss praised Jackson's work: "His movie achieves what the best fairy tales do: the creation of an alternate world, plausible and persuasive, where the young and not only the young can lose themselves. And perhaps, in identifying with the little Hobbit that could, find their better selves".[35] In his review for The Village Voice, J. Hoberman wrote, "Peter Jackson's adaptation is certainly successful on its own terms".[36] Rolling Stone magazine's Peter Travers wrote, "It's emotion that makes Fellowship stick hard in the memory ... Jackson deserves to revel in his success. He's made a three-hour film that leaves you wanting more".[37] However, in his review for The Guardian, Peter Bradshaw wrote, "there is a strange paucity of plot complication, an absence of anything unfolding, all the more disconcerting because of the clotted and indigestible mythic back story that we have to wade through before anything happens at all.[38]It is widely considered to be one of the greatest fantasy films of all time. The American Film Institute rated it as the #50 greatest movie ever made.In 2002, the film won four Academy Awards out of thirteen nominations.[39] The winning categories were for Best Cinematography, Best Visual Effects, Best Makeup, and Best Original Score. Despite its praise by fans, the other nominated categories of Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Ian McKellen), Best Art Direction, Best Director, Best Film Editing, Best Original Song (Enya, Nicky Ryan and Roma Ryan for "May It Be"), Best Picture, Best Sound (Christopher Boyes, Michael Semanick, Gethin Creagh and Hammond Peek), Costume Design and Best Adapted Screenplay were not won.As of June 2010, it is the 19th highest-grossing film worldwide, with takings of US$870,761,744 from worldwide theatrical box office receipts.[2]The film won the 2002 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation. It also won Empire readers' Best Film award, as well as five BAFTAs, including Best Film, the David Lean Award for Direction, the Audience Award (voted for by the public), Best Special Effects, and Best Make-up. The film was nominated for an MTV Movie Award for Best Fight between Gandalf and Saruman.In June 2008, AFI revealed its "Ten top Ten"the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genresafter polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring was acknowledged as the second best film in the fantasy genre.[40][41]American Film Institute recognitionThe Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring was released on VHS and DVD on 6 August 2002.On 12 November 2002, an Extended Edition was released on VHS and DVD, with 30 minutes of new material, added special effects and music, plus 20 minutes of fan-club credits, totaling to 219 minutes.[42] The DVD set included four commentaries and over three hours of supplementary material.On 29 August 2006, a Limited Edition of The Fellowship of the Ring was released on DVD. The set included both the Theatrical and Extended editions of the film on a double-sided disc along with all-new bonus material.The theatrical Blu-ray version of The Lord of the Rings was released in the United States on 6 April 2010. There were two separate sets: one with digital copies and one without.[43] The individual Blu-ray disc of The Fellowship of the Ring was released on 14 September 2010 with the same special features as the complete trilogy release, except there was no digital copy.[44]The Extended Blu-ray Editions were released in the U.S. on 28 June 2011.[45] This version has a runtime of 228 minutes.[46]10 December 2001(2001-12-10) (United Kingdom premiere)19 December 2001(2001-12-19) (United States)20 December 2001(2001-12-20) (New Zealand)1 Plot2 Cast3 Comparison with the source material4 Production

4.1 Filming locations
4.2 Special effects
4.3 Score

4.1 Filming locations4.2 Special effects4.3 Score5 Reception6 Awards7 Home video

7.1 Theatrical and Extended release
7.2 Blu-ray edition

7.1 Theatrical and Extended release7.2 Blu-ray edition8 References9 External links4.1 Filming locations4.2 Special effects4.3 Score7.1 Theatrical and Extended release7.2 Blu-ray editionElijah Wood as Frodo Baggins: A hobbit who inherits the One Ring from his uncle, Bilbo Baggins. Wood was the first actor to be cast on 7 July 1999.[10] Wood was a fan of the book, and he sent in an audition dressed as Frodo, reading lines from the novel.[11] Wood was selected from 150 actors who auditioned.[12]Ian McKellen as Gandalf the Grey: An Istari wizard and mentor to Frodo. Sean Connery was approached for the role, but did not understand the plot,[11] while Patrick Stewart turned it down, as he disliked the script.[13] Before being cast, McKellen had to sort his schedule with 20th Century Fox as there was a two-month overlap with X-Men.[12] He enjoyed playing Gandalf the Grey more than his transformed state in the next two films,[8] and based his accent on Tolkien. Unlike his on-screen character, McKellen did not spend much time with the actors playing the Hobbits, instead working with their scale doubles.[6]Viggo Mortensen as Aragorn: Dubbed Strider, he is a Dnedain ranger and the heir to the throne of Gondor. Daniel Day-Lewis was offered the part at the beginning of pre-production, but turned it down.[14] Nicolas Cage also received an offer, declining because of "family obligations",[15] while Vin Diesel, a fan of the book, auditioned for Aragorn. Stuart Townsend was cast in the role, before being replaced during filming when Jackson realised he was too young.[11] Russell Crowe was considered as a replacement, but he turned it down after taking what he thought to be a similar role in Gladiator.[11] Day-Lewis was offered the role for a second time, but declined again.[14] Producer Mark Ordesky saw Mortensen in a play. Mortensen's son, a fan of the book, convinced him to take the role.[6] Mortensen read the book on the plane, received a crash course lesson in fencing from Bob Anderson and began filming the scenes on Weathertop.[16] Mortensen became a hit with the crew by patching up his costume[17] and carrying his "hero" sword around with him offscreen.[6]Sean Astin as Samwise "Sam" Gamgee: A Hobbit gardener and Frodo's best friend. Astin, who had recently become a father, bonded with the 18-year-old Wood in a protective manner, which mirrored Sam's relationship with Frodo.[6]Orlando Bloom as Legolas: Prince of the Elves' Woodland Realm and a skilled archer. Bloom initially auditioned for Faramir, who appears in the second film, a role which went to David Wenham.[11]Liv Tyler as Arwen: An elf and Aragorn's lover. The filmmakers approached Tyler after seeing her performance in Plunkett & Macleane, and New Line Cinema leaped at the opportunity of having one Hollywood star in the film. Actress Helena Bonham Carter had expressed interest in the role.[11] Tyler came to shoot on short occasions, and bonded most with Bloom.[6] She was one of the last actors to be cast, on 25 August 1999.[18]John Rhys-Davies as Gimli: A Dwarf who accompanies the Fellowship to Mordor after they set out from Rivendell. Billy Connolly was considered for the part of Gimli.[11] Rhys-Davies wore heavy prosthetics to play Gimli, which limited his vision, and eventually he developed eczema around his eyes.[6]Sean Bean as Boromir: A prince of the Stewards of Gondor, he journeys with the Fellowship towards Mordor. Bruce Willis, a fan of the book, expressed interest in the role, while Liam Neeson was sent the script, but passed.[11]Billy Boyd as Peregrin "Pippin" Took: A Hobbit who travels with the Fellowship on their journey to Mordor.Dominic Monaghan as Meriadoc "Merry" Brandybuck: A Hobbit and distant cousin of Frodo. Monaghan was cast as Merry after auditioning for Frodo.[11]Cate Blanchett as Galadriel: An Elf and the co-ruler of Lothlrien along with her husband Celeborn. Tilda Swinton was also a possibility to the role, but she turned it down, since she was going to play a similar role as Jadis, the White Witch in The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe.Christopher Lee as Saruman the White: The fallen head of the Istari Order, who succumbed to Sauron's will via his use of the palantr. Lee is a major fan of the book, and reads it once a year. He has also met J. R. R. Tolkien.[16] He originally auditioned for Gandalf, but was judged too old.[11]Hugo Weaving as Elrond: The Elven master and Lord of Rivendell, who leads the Council of Elrond which ultimately decides to destroy the One Ring. David Bowie expressed interest in the role, but Jackson stated, "To have a famous, beloved character and a famous star colliding is slightly uncomfortable."[12]Ian Holm as Bilbo Baggins: Frodo's uncle who gives him the Ring after he decides to retire to Rivendell. Holm previously played Frodo in a 1981 radio adaption of The Lord of the Rings, and was cast as Bilbo after Jackson remembered his performance.[11] Sylvester McCoy was contacted about playing the role, and was kept in place as a potential Bilbo for six months before Jackson went with Holm.[19]AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Gandalf the Grey  Nominated Hero

Gandalf the Grey  Nominated HeroAFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers  NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  No. 50AFI's 10 Top 10  No. 2 Fantasy filmGandalf the Grey  Nominated HeroBook: The Lord of the Rings film trilogyOfficial websiteThe Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring at AllRoviThe Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring at Rotten TomatoesThe Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring at Box Office MojoThe Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring at MetacriticFilming locations on Google EarthThe Philadelphia Story is a 1940 American romantic comedy film[2][3] directed by George Cukor, starring Cary Grant, Katharine Hepburn, and James Stewart and featuring Ruth Hussey. Based on the Broadway play of the same name by Philip Barry,[4] the film is about a socialite (Hepburn) whose wedding plans are complicated by the simultaneous arrival of her ex-husband (Grant) and a tabloid magazine journalist (Stewart). Written for the screen by Donald Ogden Stewart and an uncredited Waldo Salt, it is considered one of the best examples of a comedy of remarriage, a genre popular in the 1930s and 1940s, in which a couple divorce, flirt with outsiders and then remarry  a useful story-telling ploy at a time when the depiction of extramarital affairs was blocked by the Production Code.The film was Hepburn's first big hit following several flops, which had led to her being included on a 1938 list that Manhattan movie theater owner Harry Brandt compiled of actors he considered to be "box office poison."[5] She acquired the film rights to the play, which she had also starred in, with the help of Howard Hughes,[6] in order to control it as a vehicle for her movie comeback.[7]The film was nominated for six Academy Awards, winning two: Stewart for Best Actor and Donald Ogden Stewart for Best Adapted Screenplay. It was remade in 1956 as the musical High Society, starring Bing Crosby, Grace Kelly, Frank Sinatra and Louis Armstrong.The film was produced by Joseph L. Mankiewicz and was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry in 1995.Tracy Samantha Lord Haven (Katharine Hepburn) is a wealthy Main Line Philadelphia socialite who had divorced C. K. Dexter Haven (Cary Grant), a member of her social set, because he did not measure up to her exacting standards. (He was an alcoholic, and her lack of faith in him exacerbated his condition.) She is about to marry nouveau riche "man of the people" George Kittredge (John Howard).Spy magazine publisher Sidney Kidd (Henry Daniell) is eager to cover the wedding, and he enlists Dexter, one of his former employees, to introduce reporter Macaulay "Mike" Connor (James Stewart) and photographer Liz Imbrie (Ruth Hussey) as friends of the family so they can report on the wedding. Tracy is not fooled but reluctantly agrees to let them stayafter Dexter explains that Kidd has an innuendo-laden article about Tracy's father, Seth (John Halliday), who, Tracy believes, is having an affair with a dancer. Though Seth is separated from Tracy's mother Margaret (Mary Nash) and Tracy harbors great resentment against him, she wants to protect her family's reputation.Dexter is welcomed back with open arms by Margaret and Dinah (Virginia Weidler), Tracy's teenage sistermuch to Tracy's annoyance. In addition, Tracy gradually discovers that Mike has admirable qualities, and she even takes the trouble to find his published stories in the library. Thus, as the wedding nears, Tracy finds herself torn between her fianc, her ex-husband, and the reporter.The night before the wedding, Tracy gets drunk for only the second time in her life and takes an innocent swim with Mike. When George sees Mike carrying an intoxicated Tracy into the house afterward, he thinks the worst. The next day, he tells her that he was shocked and feels entitled to an explanation before going ahead with the wedding. Tracy takes exception to his lack of faith in her and breaks off the engagement. Then she realizes that all the guests have arrived and are waiting for the ceremony to begin. Mike volunteers to marry her (much to Liz's distress), but Tracy graciously declines. At this point, Dexter makes his bid for her hand, which she accepts.Broadway playwright Philip Barry[9] wrote The Philadelphia Story specifically for Katharine Hepburn, who ended up backing the play, and foregoing a salary in return for a percentage of the play's profits.[10] Co-starring with Hepburn on Broadway were Joseph Cotten as "C.K. Dexter Haven", Van Heflin as "Macauley Connor", with Shirley Booth as "Liz Imbrie".[4]Hoping to create a film vehicle for herself which would erase the label of "box office poison" that the Independent Theatre Owners of America had put on her after a number of commercial failures (including the classic Bringing Up Baby), Hepburn happily accepted the film rights to the play from Howard Hughes who had bought them for her. She then convinced MGM's Louis B. Mayer to buy them from her for only $250,000 in return for Hepburn having veto over producer, director, screenwriter and cast.[7][10][11]Hepburn selected director George Cukor, whose A Bill of Divorcement (1932) and Little Women (1933) she had acted in, and Donald Ogden Stewart, a friend of Barry's and a specialist at adapting plays to the big screen, as writer.[10]Hepburn wanted Clark Gable for the Dexter Haven role and Spencer Tracy as Macauley Connor, but both had other commitments. Grant agreed to play the part on condition that he be given top billing and that his salary would be $137,000, which he donated to the British War Relief Society.[citation needed] The pairing of Cukor and Clark Gable would have been problematic in any case, as they had not gotten along on the recent Gone with the Wind, and Cukor had been replaced with Victor Fleming.[citation needed]The Philadelphia Story was in production from 5 July to 14 August 1940[12] at MGM's studios in Culver City.[13] The film was shot in eight weeks and came in five days under schedule.[7] At one point, James Stewart slipped in his hiccuping during the drunk scene. Grant turned to him, surprised, and said "Excuse me," then appears to stifle a laugh. The scene was kept and was not reshot.[14]Stewart had been extremely nervous about the scene in which Connor recites poetry to Tracy and believed that he would perform badly. Nol Coward was visiting the set that day and was asked by Cukor to say something to encourage him. Stewart was also quite uncomfortable with some of the dialogue, especially in the swimming pool scene.Hepburn performed the dive into the swimming pool entirely by herself without the help from doubles. Forty years later, during the filming of On Golden Pond, Jane Fonda was frightened to do her own dive, to which the annoyed Hepburn responded, "I did my own dive in The Philadelphia Story."The Philadelphia Story premiered in New York City in the week of 27 December 1940 and it was shown in other selected theatres in December, but MGM had agreed to hold the film's general release until January 1941 in order not to compete with the stage play,[7] which was no longer playing on Broadway, but was touring the country.[4] The film went into general American release on 17 January 1941.[15] The film broke a box office record at Radio City Music Hall by taking in $600,000 in just six weeks.According to Bosley Crowther, the film "has just about everything that a blue-chip comedy should havea witty, romantic script derived by Donald Ogden Stewart out of Philip Barry's successful play; the flavor of high-society elegance, in which the patrons invariably luxuriate, and a splendid cast of performers headed by Katharine Hepburn, James Stewart and Cary Grant. If it doesn't play out this year and well along into next they should turn the Music Hall into a shooting gallery....Metro and Director George Cukor have graciously made it apparent, in the words of a character, that one of 'the prettiest sights in this pretty world is the privileged classes enjoying their privileges.' And so, in this instance, will you, too."[16]The Philadelphia Story was the last of four films starring Grant and Hepburn, the others being Sylvia Scarlett (1935), Bringing Up Baby (1938), and Holiday (1938). All but Sylvia Scarlett belong to a sub-genre of screwball comedy called the comedy of remarriage described by the philosopher Stanley Cavell as Hollywood's crowning achievement.At the 1940 Academy Awards The Philadelphia Story received 6 nominations:James Stewart and Donald Ogden Stewart won Academy Awards.James Stewart was not expecting to win and was not planning to attend the awards ceremony. He was called and "advised" to show up in a dinner jacket. Stewart himself said he had voted for Henry Fonda for his performance in The Grapes of Wrath, and always felt the award had been given to him as compensation for not winning the Academy Award for his portrayal of Jeff Smith in Mr. Smith Goes to Washington. Donald Ogden Stewart, on the other hand, declared upon winning his Oscar: "I have no one to thank but myself!"[10]Hepburn won a 1940 New York Film Critics Circle Award for her performance,[17] and the film was named one of the ten best of the year by Film Daily.[18]In 1995, The Philadelphia Story film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.The stars of the film appeared on Lux Radio Theater's radio adaptation of Barry's play in 1942. Lux presented it again in 1943 with Robert Taylor, Loretta Young and Robert Young.[7] It was also adapted on two episodes of The Screen Guild Theater, first with Greer Garson, Henry Fonda and Fred MacMurray (April 5, 1942), then with Hepburn, Grant and Stewart reprising their film roles (March 17, 1947).The film was adapted in 1956 as the MGM musical High Society, starring Bing Crosby, Grace Kelly, Frank Sinatra and Louis Armstrong, directed by Charles Walters.Streaming audioDecember 26, 1940(1940-12-26)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Critical reception5 Awards and honors6 Adaptations7 Gallery8 References9 External linksCary Grant as C. K. Dexter HavenKatharine Hepburn as Tracy LordJames Stewart as Macaulay ConnorRuth Hussey as Elizabeth ImbrieJohn Howard as George KittredgeRoland Young as William Q. Tracy (Uncle Willie)John Halliday as Seth LordMary Nash as Margaret LordVirginia Weidler as Dinah LordHenry Daniell as Sidney KiddLionel Pape as Edward, a footmanRex Evans as Thomas, the butlerDavid Clyde as Mac, the night watchmanThe character of "Tracy Lord" was inspired by Helen Hope Montgomery Scott (19041995), a Philadelphia socialite known for her hijinks, who married a friend of playwright Philip Barry.[8]Outstanding Production  MGM (Joseph L. Mankiewicz, Producer)Best Director  George CukorBest Actor  James StewartBest Actress  Katharine HepburnBest Writing, Screenplay  Donald Ogden StewartBest Supporting Actress  Ruth HusseyAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - #51AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs - #15AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions - #44AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"You're lit from within, Tracy. You've got fires banked down in you, hearth-fires and holocausts." - Nominated[19]

"You're lit from within, Tracy. You've got fires banked down in you, hearth-fires and holocausts." - Nominated[19]AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - Nominated[20]AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #44AFI's 10 Top 10 - #5 Romantic Comedy[21]"You're lit from within, Tracy. You've got fires banked down in you, hearth-fires and holocausts." - Nominated[19]



















































































The Philadelphia Story at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Philadelphia Story at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Philadelphia Story at AllRoviThe Philadelphia Story at Rotten TomatoesNYTimes ReviewHistoric reviews, photo gallery at CaryGrant.netCallahan, Michael (December 2010). "The Story Behind The Philadelphia Story". Philadelphia. http://www.phillymag.com/articles/feature-the-story-behind-the-philadelphia-story/. Retrieved August 22, 2012.The Philadelphia Story on Lux Radio Theater: July 20, 1942The Philadelphia Story on Lux Radio Theater: June 14, 1943The Philadelphia Story on Screen Guild Theater: March 17, 1947From Here to Eternity is a 1953 drama film directed by Fred Zinnemann and based on the novel of the same name by James Jones. It deals with the troubles of soldiers, played by Burt Lancaster, Montgomery Clift, Frank Sinatra and Ernest Borgnine, stationed on Hawaii in the months leading up to the attack on Pearl Harbor. Deborah Kerr and Donna Reed portrayed the women in their lives.The film won eight Academy Awards out of 13 nominations, including for Picture, Best Director (Fred Zinnemann), Adapted Screenplay, Supporting Actor (Frank Sinatra) and Supporting Actress (Donna Reed).[2]In 1941, Private Robert E. Lee Prewitt (Montgomery Clift), a bugler, is transferred from the Bugle Corps at Fort Shafter (giving up his corporal stripes) to a rifle outfit, Company "G," at Schofield Barracks on the island of Oahu. When Captain Dana "Dynamite" Holmes (Philip Ober) learns of his reputation as a talented boxer, he recommends that Prewitt join the regimental boxing club that he heads, and promises that Prewitt will be promoted to corporal or even sergeant, if he helps win the boxing trophy on December 15, but Prewitt refuses, though he keeps silent about his reasons. Holmes retaliates by making army life as miserable as possible for Prewitt, hoping he will give in. Unable to break Prewitt's spirit, Holmes orders First Sergeant Milton Warden (Burt Lancaster) to prepare court martial papers. Warden, however, knowing of Holmes' treatment and realizing Prewitt is a career soldier, suggests that he try to entice Prewitt to change his mind by doubling up on company punishment. The other non-commissioned officers assist in the conspiracy. Prewitt is supported only by his friend, Private Angelo Maggio (Frank Sinatra).Meanwhile, Warden begins an affair with Holmes' neglected wife Karen (Deborah Kerr). Sergeant Maylon Stark (George Reeves) has told Warden that Karen had many affairs at Fort Bliss, including with him. As their relationship develops, Warden asks Karen about her numerous affairs to test her sincerity with him. Karen relates that Holmes has been unfaithful to her most of their marriage. She miscarried one night when Holmes came back from one affair drunk, and unable to assist her to the hospital, resulting in her not being able to bear any more children. She then affirms her genuine love for Warden.Prewitt and Maggio spend their liberty time at the New Congress Club, a gentlemen's club where Prewitt meets and falls for Lorene (Donna Reed). Prewitt confides to Lorene the reason he refuses to box for the company is that he blinded Dixie Wells, a close friend while sparring. Maggio encounters Sergeant Judson (Ernest Borgnine) at the club. When Maggio complains that Judson's piano playing is interfering with his dancing, the two nearly come to blows. Maggio is told that Judson is the Sergeant of the Guard at the stockade.Later, at a tavern called "Choy's," located near the base, Judson sees Maggio holding a photograph of his family. Judson makes a rude comment to Prewitt about Maggio's sister causing Maggio to smash a bar stool over Judson's head. Judson pulls a switchblade on Maggio, but Warden, sitting in a corner, intervenes to save Maggio by telling Judson that killing Maggio would "create two weeks of paperwork" for him. When Judson advances on Warden with the knife, Warden breaks a beer bottle in two and uses the jagged edge as a weapon. Judson retreats, throws down his knife and goes to the bar for a drink. Warden states, "As soldiers, he would prefer two Camp Fire Girls over Judson and Maggio." However, Judson warns Maggio that sooner or later Maggio will end up in the stockade and he would be there waiting for him.Karen tells Warden that if he became an officer, she could divorce Holmes and they could return to the States and marry. Warden is not keen on the idea because of his dislike of officers, but agrees to consider the matter. Prewitt manages a weekend pass, courtesy of Warden, and goes to meet Lorene who is too busy at the club to talk. However, she meets him later at a bar for a drink. He tells Lorene he loves the Army, and shows Lorene his prized possession, a bugle mouthpiece. Prew tells her the honor of his lifetime, being selected to play Taps at Arlington National Cemetery on Armistice Day with the President in attendance. Maggio then walks in drunk and in uniform, explaining that he was assigned to guard duty that night, but deserted his post. Lorene encourages Prewitt to take Maggio back to the base. While Prewitt is calling for a cab, Military Police arrive and arrest Maggio, and he is sentenced to six months in the stockade.Matters come to a head for Prewitt when Sergeant Galovitch picks a fight with Prewitt while on yard detail, and the two come to blows. At first, Galovitch repeatedly pummels Prewitt, who initially refuses to fight back, and then resorts to using only body blows. But as Galovitch and others watching continue taunting him, Prewitt's fighting side re-emerges, and Prewitt comes close to knocking Galovitch out before Holmes (observing from outside the crowd) finally steps in and stops the fight. When Galovitch falsely accuses Prewitt of insubordination, Holmes is about to punish Prewitt again until the man in charge of the detail says that it was Galovitch, not Prewitt, who was spoiling for the fight. But instead of punishing Galovitch, Holmes abruptly lets him off the hook and disperses the crowd. The entire incident is witnessed by the base commander, who orders an investigation by the Inspector General. When Holmes' true intentions are revealed to the commander, he orders a court-martial. When Holmes begs for an alternative, the commander's aide suggests that Holmes resign his commission "for the good of the service" and leave the Army, which the general accepts with dispatch. Holmes' replacement, Captain Ross, verbally reprimands the others involved, and then orders Sergeant Galovitch's demotion to private and put in charge of the latrine.Maggio manages to escape from the stockade and find Prewitt and dies in his arms after telling of the abuse he suffered from Judson in the stockade. The following night Prewitt plays taps as tears stream down his cheeks. Seeking revenge, Prewitt tracks down Judson in town and invites him into a back alley to talk, then attacks him using the very same switchblade Judson had pulled on Maggio earlier. Prewitt kills Judson, but not before sustaining a serious stomach wound. Prewitt runs from the alley and goes into hiding at Lorene's apartment. Despite Prewitt's AWOL status, his platoon sergeant carries him "present" for three days at Warden's direction. Lorene, whose real name is Alma, tends to Prewitt's wounds.When the Japanese attack Pearl Harbor, Prewitt, still weak from his unhealed wound, finds out about the attack, and attempts to return to camp under cover of darkness, but is shot dead by a sentry. Warden identifies the body, laments Prewitt's stubbornness and states the irony that because of the attack, the boxing tournament is cancelled. However, he tells the other soldiers that Prewitt was in the end, a good soldier, and that he "loved the army more that any man I know."Holmes' resignation results in Karen having to return to the States with him. When she finds out that Warden failed to apply for officer status, she realizes they will never be together.At the end, Lorene and Karen meet on a ship leaving for the mainland. Karen then tosses two leis into the water. She tells Alma, "There's a legend: if they float to shore, you'll return to Hawaii. If they float out to sea, you'll never return." Alma says she will never return, telling Karen that her fianc was an Army Air Corps pilot killed in a B-17 during the attack, "he was awarded the Silver Star, they sent it to his mother. She wrote me. She wanted me to have it. They are very fine people, Southern people. He was named after a general. Robert E. Lee... Prewitt." Karen recognizes Prewitt's name from conversations with Warden. Lorene holds Prewitt's treasured bugle mouth piece.The novel's author, James Jones, had a small, uncredited part.Hollywood legend has it that Frank Sinatra got the role in the movie because of his alleged Mafia connections, and that this was the basis for a similar subplot in The Godfather.[3] This has been dismissed on several occasions, however, by the cast and crew of the film. Director Fred Zinneman commented that "...the legend about a horse's head having been cut off is pure invention, a poetic license on the part of Mario Puzo who wrote The Godfather."[3] More plausible is the notion that Sinatra's then-wife Ava Gardner persuaded studio head Harry Cohn's wife to use her influence with him; this version is related by Kitty Kelley in her Sinatra biography.[3] Sinatra himself had been bombarding Cohn with letters and telegrams asking to play the ill-fated Maggio, even signing some of the letters "Maggio". Sinatra benefited when Eli Wallach, who was originally cast as Maggio, dropped out to appear on Broadway instead. Sinatra gained the role, ultimately taking a pay cut in the process (earning $8,000, a huge drop from his $130,000 salary for Anchors Aweigh) to star in the film.Sinatra's screen-test was used in the final cut of the film; the scene included Sinatra improvising with a handful of olives, pretending they were a pair of dice.Joan Crawford and Gladys George were offered roles, but George lost her role when the director decided he wanted to cast the female roles against type while Crawford's demands to be filmed by her own cameraman led to the studio taking a chance on Deborah Kerr, also playing against type.[4]The material of the rather explicit novel had to be considerably toned down to appease the censors of the time. For example, in the famous beach scene, it is less obvious that Kerr's and Lancaster's characters are having sex than it is in the novel and in the later, miniseries based on the book. Also left out of the film are Maggio being a male hustler and the portrait of the gay nightlife in Waikiki.The on-screen chemistry between Lancaster and Kerr may have spilled off-screen; it was alleged that the stars became romantically involved during filming.[5]A rumor has been circulating for years that George Reeves, who played Sgt. Maylon Stark, had his role drastically edited after preview audiences recognized him as television's Superman. This is depicted in the film Hollywoodland. However, Zinnemann maintains all his scenes were kept intact from the first draft, nor was there ever a preview screening.The U.S. Army withheld its cooperation from the production (most of the movie was filmed where it was set, at Schofield Barracks, Hawaii) until the producers agreed to several modifications, most noticeably the fate of Captain Holmes. Numerous barracks locations are still intact and still occupied by active duty troops. In both the movie and the book the bar and restaurant called Choy's, where the fight scene takes place in the movie and where the novel opens is named Kemo'o (pronounced "kay-moe-o" in Hawaiian) Farms Bar and Grill. Choy's was chosen by James Jones in honor of Kemo'o Farms' head chef. Kemo'o Farms Bar and Grill is still in operation and remains deeply associated with the adjacent Schofield Barracks, and the cast and crew, especially Sinatra, are reputed to have patronized the bar to the point of excess.Two songs are noteworthy: "Re-Enlistment Blues" and "From Here to Eternity", by Robert Wells and Fred Karger.Opening to rave reviews, From Here to Eternity proved to be an instant hit with critics and the public alike, the Southern California Motion Picture Council extolling: "A motion picture so great in its starkly realistic and appealing drama that mere words cannot justly describe it." Variety agreed: "The James Jones bestseller, 'From Here to Eternity,' has become an outstanding motion picture in this smash screen adaptation. It is an important film from any angle, presenting socko entertainment for big business. The cast names are exceptionally good, the exploitation and word-of-mouth values are topnotch, and the prospects in all playdates are very bright whether special key bookings or general run." [6]Of the actors, Variety went on to say, "Burt Lancaster, whose presence adds measurably to the marquee weight of the strong cast names, wallops the character of Top Sergeant Milton Warden, the professional soldier who wet-nurses a weak, pompous commanding officer and the GIs under him. It is a performance to which he gives depth of character as well as the muscles which had gained marquee importance for his name. Montgomery Clift, with a reputation for sensitive, three-dimensional performances, adds another to his growing list as the independent GI who refuses to join the company boxing team, taking instead the "treatment" dished out at the C.O.'s instructions. Frank Sinatra scores a decided hit as Angelo Maggio, a violent, likeable Italo-American GI. While some may be amazed at this expression of the Sinatra talent versatility, it will come as no surprise to those who remember the few times he has had a chance to be something other than a crooner in films.[6]The New York Post applauded Frank Sinatra, remarking that "He proves he is an actor by playing the luckless Maggio with a kind of doomed gaiety that is both real and immensely touching." Newsweek also stated that "Frank Sinatra, a crooner long since turned actor, knew what he was doing when he plugged for the role of Maggio."The cast agreed, Burt Lancaster commenting in the book Sinatra: An American Legend that "His fervour (Sinatra), his bitterness had something to do with the character of Maggio, but also with what he had gone through the last number of years. A sense of defeat and the whole world crashing in on him... They all came out in that performance."[3]With a gross of $30.5 million equating to earnings of $12.2 million, From Here to Eternity was not only one of the top grossing films of 1953, but one of the ten highest-grossing films of the decade. Adjusted for inflation, its box office gross would be equivalent to in excess of $240 million U.S. in recent times.[1]William Holden, who won the Best Actor Oscar for Stalag 17, felt that Lancaster should have won. Sinatra would later comment that he thought his performance of heroin addict Frankie Machine in The Man With the Golden Arm was more deserving of an Oscar than his role as Maggio.In 2002, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.August 5, 1953(1953-08-05)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception5 Awards and nominations

5.1 Academy Awards
5.2 Golden Globe Awards
5.3 New York Film Critics' Circle Awards
5.4 Cannes Film Festival
5.5 British Academy of Film and Television Arts
5.6 Directors Guild of America
5.7 Writers Guild of America
5.8 Photoplay
5.9 National Film Registry
5.10 American Film Institute

5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Golden Globe Awards5.3 New York Film Critics' Circle Awards5.4 Cannes Film Festival5.5 British Academy of Film and Television Arts5.6 Directors Guild of America5.7 Writers Guild of America5.8 Photoplay5.9 National Film Registry5.10 American Film Institute6 References7 External links5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Golden Globe Awards5.3 New York Film Critics' Circle Awards5.4 Cannes Film Festival5.5 British Academy of Film and Television Arts5.6 Directors Guild of America5.7 Writers Guild of America5.8 Photoplay5.9 National Film Registry5.10 American Film InstituteBurt Lancaster as First Sergeant Milton WardenMontgomery Clift as Private Robert E. Lee "Prew" PrewittDeborah Kerr as Karen HolmesDonna Reed as Alma "Lorene" BurkeFrank Sinatra as Private Angelo MaggioPhilip Ober as Captain Dana "Dynamite" HolmesMickey Shaughnessy as Corporal LevaHarry Bellaver as Private First Class MazzioliErnest Borgnine as Staff Sergeant James R. "Fatso" JudsonJack Warden as Corporal BuckleyJohn Dennis as Sergeant Ike GalovitchMerle Travis as Sal AndersonTim Ryan as Sergeant Pete KarelsenArthur Keegan as TreadwellBarbara Morrison as Mrs. KipferGeorge Reeves as Sergeant Maylon StarkClaude Akins as Sergeant 'Baldy' DhomAlvin Sargent as NairJoseph Sargent as soldierRobert J. Wilke as Sergeant HendersonCarleton Young as Colonel AyresTyler McVey as Major Stern (uncredited)Winner Golden Globe Best Supporting Actor  Frank SinatraWinner Best Director  Fred ZinnemanWinner New York Film Critics' Circle Awards Best FilmWinner Best Actor  Burt LancasterWinner Best Director  Fred ZinnemanWinner 1954 Cannes Film Festival Special Award of MeritNominated Grand Prize of the Festival[7]Nominated BAFTA Best Film from Any SourceWinner Directors Guild of America Outstanding Directorial Achievement  Fred ZinnemanWinner Writers Guild of America Award Best Written American DramaWinner Photoplay Awards  Gold Medal1998 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies #522002 AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions #20Buford, Kate. Burt Lancaster: An American Life. New York: Knopf, 2000. ISBN 0-679-44603-6.Dolan Edward F. Jr. Hollywood Goes to War. London: Bison Books, 1985. ISBN 0-86124-229-7.Evans, Alun. Brassey's Guide to War Films. Dulles, Virginia: Potomac Books, 2000. ISBN 1-57488-263-5.Sinatra, Nancy. Frank Sinatra: An American Legend. Chappaqua, New York: Readers Digest Association, 1995. ISBN 0-7621-0134-2.From Here to Eternity at the Internet Movie DatabaseFrom Here to Eternity at AllRoviFrom Here to Eternity at the TCM Movie DatabaseFrom Here to Eternity at Rotten TomatoesFrom Here to Eternity at Virtual HistoryScript (pdf)Amadeus is a 1984 period drama film directed by Milo Forman and written by Peter Shaffer. Adapted from Shaffer's stage play Amadeus (1979), the story is a variation of Alexander Pushkin's play Mozart i Salieri (  , 1830), in which the composer Antonio Salieri recognizes the genius of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart but thwarts him out of envy. The story is set in Vienna, Austria, during the latter half of the 18th century.The film was nominated for 53 awards and received 40, including eight Academy Awards (including Best Picture), four BAFTA Awards, four Golden Globes, and a Directors Guild of America (DGA) award. In 1998, the American Film Institute ranked Amadeus 53rd on its 100 Years... 100 Movies list.The story begins in 1823 as the elderly Antonio Salieri (F. Murray Abraham) attempts suicide by slitting his throat while loudly begging forgiveness for having killed Mozart (Tom Hulce) in 1791. Placed in a lunatic asylum for the act, Salieri is visited by Father Vogler (Richard Frank), a young priest who seeks to take his confession. Salieri is sullen and uninterested but eventually warms to the priest and launches into a long "confession" about his relationship with Mozart.Salieri's tale goes on through the night and into the next day. He reminisces about his youth, particularly about his devotion to God and his love for music and how he pledges to God to remain celibate as a sacrifice if he can somehow devote his life to music. He describes how his father's plans for him were to go into commerce, but suggests that the sudden death of his father, who choked to death during a meal, was "a miracle" that allowed him to pursue a career in music. In his narrative, he is suddenly an adult joining the 18th century cultural elite in Vienna, the "city of musicians." Salieri begins his career as a devout, God-fearing man who believes his success and talent as a composer are Gods rewards for his piety. He is content as the court composer for Holy Roman Emperor Joseph II (Jeffrey Jones).Mozart arrives in Vienna with his patron, Count Hieronymus von Colloredo (Nicholas Kepros), the Prince-Archbishop of Salzburg. Salieri secretly observes Mozart at the Archbishop's palace, but they are not properly introduced. Salieri sees that offstage, Mozart is irreverent and lewd. He also first recognizes the immense talent displayed in the adult works of Mozart. In 1781, when Mozart meets the Emperor, Salieri presents Mozart with a "March of Welcome," which he toiled to create. After hearing the march only once, Mozart plays it from memory, critiques it, and effortlessly improvises a variation, transforming Salieri's "trifle" into the "Non pi andrai" march from his 1786 opera The Marriage of Figaro.Salieri reels at the notion of God speaking through the childish, petulant Mozart: nevertheless, he regards his music as miraculous. Gradually, Salieris faith is shaken. He believes that God, through Mozart's genius, is cruelly laughing at Salieri's own musical mediocrity. Salieri's struggles with God are intercut with scenes showing Mozart's own trials and tribulations with life in Vienna: pride at the initial reception of his music, anger and disbelief over his subsequent treatment by the Italians of the Emperor's court, happiness with his wife Constanze (Elizabeth Berridge) and his son Karl, and grief at the death of his father Leopold (Roy Dotrice). Mozart becomes more desperate as the family's expenses increase and his commissions decrease. When Salieri learns of Mozart's financial straits, he sees his chance to avenge himself, using "God's Beloved" (the literal meaning of "Amadeus") as the instrument.Salieri hatches a complex plot to gain ultimate victory over Mozart and God. He disguises himself in a mask and costume similar to one he saw Leopold wear at a party, and commissions Mozart to write a requiem mass, giving him a down payment and the promise of an enormous sum upon completion. Mozart begins to write the piece, the Requiem Mass in D minor, unaware of the true identity of his mysterious patron and oblivious of his murderous intentions. Glossing over any details of how he might commit the murder, Salieri dwells on the anticipation of the admiration of his peers and the court, when they applaud the magnificent Requiem, and he claims to be the music's composer. Only Salieri and God would know the truththat Mozart wrote his own requiem mass, and that God could only watch while Salieri finally receives the fame and renown that he deserves.Mozart's financial situation worsens and the composing demands of the Requiem and The Magic Flute drive him to the point of exhaustion as he alternates work between the two pieces. Constanze leaves him and takes their son with her. His health worsens, and he collapses during the premiere performance of The Magic Flute. Salieri takes the stricken Mozart home and convinces him to work on the Requiem. Mozart dictates while Salieri transcribes throughout the night. When Constanze returns in the morning, she tells Salieri to leave. Constanze locks the manuscript away despite Salieri's objections, but as she goes to wake her husband, she finds that Mozart is dead. The Requiem is left unfinished, and Salieri is left powerless as Mozart's body is hauled out of Vienna for burial in a pauper's mass grave.The film ends as Salieri finishes recounting his story to the visibly shaken young priest. Salieri concludes that God killed Mozart rather than allow Salieri to share in even an ounce of his glory, and that he is consigned to be the "patron saint of mediocrity." Salieri absolves the priest of his own mediocrity and blesses his fellow patients as he is taken away in his wheelchair. The last sound heard before the credits roll is Mozart's high-pitched laughter, implied to be God laughing at Salieri.In his autobiography Beginning, Kenneth Branagh says that he was one of the finalists for the role of Mozart, but was dropped from consideration when Forman decided to make the film with an American cast.[1] Hulce reportedly used John McEnroe's mood swings as a source of inspiration for his portrayal of Mozart's unpredictable genius.[2]Meg Tilly was cast as Mozart's wife Constanze, but she tore a ligament in her leg the day before shooting started.[2] She was replaced by Elizabeth Berridge. Simon Callow, who played Mozart in the original London stage production of Amadeus, was cast as Emanuel Schikaneder, the librettist of The Magic Flute.The film was shot on location in Prague, Krom and Vienna. Notably, Forman was able to shoot scenes in the Count Nostitz Theatre in Prague, where Don Giovanni and La Clemenza di Tito debuted two centuries before. Several other scenes were shot at the Barrandov Studios.In 1985, the film was nominated for eleven Academy Awards, including the double nomination for Best Actor with Hulce and Abraham each being nominated for their portrayals of Mozart and Salieri, respectively. The film won eight Oscars, including Best Picture, Best Actor (Abraham), Best Director (Forman), Costume Design (Theodor Pitk), Adapted Screenplay (Shaffer), Art Direction (Patrizia von Brandenstein), Best Makeup, and Best Sound. The film was nominated for but did not win Oscars for Best Cinematography and Best Editing. Amadeus, The English Patient and The Hurt Locker are the only Best Picture winners to never enter the weekend box office top 5 after rankings began being recorded in 1982.[3][4][5] Amadeus peaked at #6 during its 8th weekend in theaters. Saul Zaentz produced both Amadeus and The English Patient.The film was nominated for six Golden Globes (Hulce and Abraham were nominated together) and won four, including awards to Forman, Abraham, Shaffer, and Golden Globe Award for Best Picture Drama. Jeffrey Jones was nominated for Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actor Motion Picture Drama. Forman also received the Directors Guild of America Award for his work.At the end of the Oscar ceremony, Laurence Olivier came on stage to present the Oscar for Best Picture. As Olivier thanked the Academy for inviting him, he was already opening the envelope. Instead of announcing the nominees, he simply read, "The winner for this is Amadeus." An AMPAS official quickly went onstage to confirm the winner and signaled that all was well, before Olivier then presented the award to producer Saul Zaentz. Olivier (in his 78th year) had been ill for many years, and it was due to suffering from amnesia that he forgot to read the nominees.[6] Zaentz then thanked Olivier, saying it was an honour to receive the award from him,[7] before mentioning the other nominees in his acceptance speech: The Killing Fields, A Passage to India, Places in the Heart and A Soldier's Story. Maurice Jarre won the award for best original music score for his scoring of A Passage to India. In his acceptance speech for the award, Jarre remarked "I was lucky Mozart was not eligible this year".[8]Amadeus premiered in 1984 as a PG-rated movie with a running time of 161 minutes. In 2002, director Milos Forman introduced an R-rated version with nearly 20 minutes of restored footage. This version was dubbed by the studios as a Director's Cut. In the 1995 supplemental material for Pioneer's deluxe LaserDisc, Milos Forman had justified why those scenes were cut in the first place. However, in a subsequent 2002 interview with A.V. Club the director explains why the scenes were eventually restored:Milos Forman on what prompted him to release the alternate version:[9]When you finish a film, before the first paying audience sees it, you don't have any idea. You don't know if you made a success or a flop, when it comes to the box office. And in the '80s, with MTV on the scene, we are having a three-hour film about classical music, with long names and wigs and costumes. Don't forget that no major studio wanted to finance the film, for these reasons. So we said, 'Well, we don't want to be pushing the audience's patience too far.' Whatever was not directly connected to the plot, I just cut out. But it was a mutual decision [to limit the running time]. I wanted the best life for the film myself...Well, once we are re-releasing it on DVD, it doesn't matter if it is two hours and 40 minutes long, or three hours long. So why don't we do the version as it was written in the script?The film had an effect on popular music and continues to influence writers and musicians. One well-known example is "Rock Me Amadeus," by Austrian pop artist Falco, which was a hit in 1985. American rock band Fall Out Boy released a bonus track titled "From Now On We Are Enemies," which features lyrics that act as a conversation between Salieri and God. Finnish metal band Children of Bodom uses Salieri's quote, "From now on we are enemies... you and I..." as the introduction to their song "Warheart." The album Beyond Abilities by progressive metal band Warmen uses quotations from the film, and includes a track titled "Salieri Strikes Back." Warmen's later album Accept the Fact also uses a quote from Amadeus, and has a song called "Return of Salieri.". Also, the German Band Megaherz did a cover of Falco's song.Abraham appears in the 1993 film Last Action Hero. The young boy, Danny, tells Arnold Schwarzenegger not to trust Abraham, because, "He killed Mozart!" Schwarzenegger asks, "In a movie?" Danny responds, "Amadeus! It won eight Oscars!"Amadeus has been parodied several times, including in episodes of The Simpsons ("Margical History Tour"), Freakazoid, Mr. Show, 30 Rock ("Succession"), How I Met Your Mother ("The Best Burger in New York"), Family Guy ("It Takes a Village Idiot, and I Married One").Film composer John Strauss won a Grammy Award for producing the soundtrack to the film.[10](all composed by Mozart except as noted)The original soundtrack to Amadeus reached #56 on Billboard's album charts, making it one of the most popular recordings of classical music ever. All of the tracks were composed by Mozart, save an early Hungarian folk tune and the final movement Quando Corpus Morietur et Amen by Giovanni Battista Pergolesi, from his famous Stabat Mater.The film features some music that is not included on the original soundtrack album release. As stated above, except where specified, all tracks were performed by the Academy of St. Martin in the Fields, conducted by Sir Neville Marriner, and all were performed specifically for use in the film. According to the film commentary by Forman and Schaffer, Marriner agreed to score the film if Mozart's music was completely unchanged from Mozart's original scores. Marriner did add some notes to Salieri's music that are noticeable in the beginning of the film, as Salieri begins his confession.Music featured in the film but not included on the soundtrack album (but included in a later extended version):September 19, 1984(1984-09-19)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception5 Alternate versions6 Popular culture7 Music

7.1 Original soundtrack album

7.1 Original soundtrack album8 Awards and nominations

8.1 United States
8.2 United Kingdom
8.3 Italy
8.4 France
8.5 Japan
8.6 Norway

8.1 United States8.2 United Kingdom8.3 Italy8.4 France8.5 Japan8.6 Norway9 References10 External links7.1 Original soundtrack album8.1 United States8.2 United Kingdom8.3 Italy8.4 France8.5 Japan8.6 NorwayF. Murray Abraham as Antonio SalieriTom Hulce as Wolfgang Amadeus MozartElizabeth Berridge as Constanze MozartRoy Dotrice as Leopold MozartJeffrey Jones as Emperor Joseph IICharles Kay as Count Orsini-RosenbergSimon Callow as Emanuel SchikanederJonathan Moore as Baron van SwietenRoderick Cook as Count Von StrackPatrick Hines as Kappelmeister BonnoRichard Frank as Father VoglerChristine Ebersole as Caterina CavalieriCynthia Nixon as Lorl, Mozart's maidNicholas Kepros as Count Hieronymus von Colloredo, Prince-Archbishop of SalzburgThe Orchestra: Academy of St. Martin in the Fields, conducted by Sir Neville MarrinerThe Choruses

Academy Chorus of St Martin In The Fields, conducted by Laszlo Heltay
Ambrosian Opera Chorus, conducted by John McCarthy
The Choristers of Westminster Abbey, conducted by Simon Preston

Academy Chorus of St Martin In The Fields, conducted by Laszlo HeltayAmbrosian Opera Chorus, conducted by John McCarthyThe Choristers of Westminster Abbey, conducted by Simon PrestonAcademy Chorus of St Martin In The Fields, conducted by Laszlo HeltayAmbrosian Opera Chorus, conducted by John McCarthyThe Choristers of Westminster Abbey, conducted by Simon PrestonInstrumental soloists

Concerto for Piano in Eb, K482, performed by Ivan Moravec
Concerto for Piano in D minor, K466, performed by Imogen Cooper
Adagio in C minor for Glass Harmonica, K617, performed by Thomas Bloch with The Brussels Virtuosi, conducted by Marc Grauwels

Concerto for Piano in Eb, K482, performed by Ivan MoravecConcerto for Piano in D minor, K466, performed by Imogen CooperAdagio in C minor for Glass Harmonica, K617, performed by Thomas Bloch with The Brussels Virtuosi, conducted by Marc GrauwelsConcerto for Piano in Eb, K482, performed by Ivan MoravecConcerto for Piano in D minor, K466, performed by Imogen CooperAdagio in C minor for Glass Harmonica, K617, performed by Thomas Bloch with The Brussels Virtuosi, conducted by Marc GrauwelsParody backgrounds

San Francisco Symphony Chorus

San Francisco Symphony ChorusSan Francisco Symphony ChorusCaro mio ben by Giuseppe Giordani

Michele Esposito, soprano

Michele Esposito, sopranoMichele Esposito, sopranoDisc OneDisc TwoThe Magic Flute, Queen of the Night aria Der Hlle Rache performed by June AndersonThe Magic Flute, Ein Mdchen oder Weibchen... (Papageno), and Pa-pa-gena! ... Pa-pa-geno! (Papageno and Papagena) performed by Brian Kay and Gillian FisherAxur, Re d'Ormus, Son queste le speranze... Salieri's opera shown in the beginning of the filmDie Entfhrung aus dem Serail, Martern aller Arten... First opera that Mozart conducts in the filmLe Nozze Di Figaro, Cinque...dieci...venti...trenta... The scene where Figaro (Samuel Ramey) is measuring a space for his wedding bedDon Giovanni, La Ci Darem La Mano appears as a parody sung as "Give me a hoof my darling, and I'll give you my heart"Piano Concerto in D minor, K. 466 1st movementK.33B Harpsichord piece in F major, played when Mozart is a child at the harpsichord, then on the violin (while blindfolded).Piano Concerto No.15 KV.450, B-dur  3. Allegro, played in the Theatrical version when Mozart is walking through Vienna carrying a bottle of champagne, and in the Director's Cut when Mozart is teaching a girl to play the piano and is interrupted by barking dogs.The 'improvisation', "in the manner of Johann Sebastian Bach" is based on the Duetto Vivat Bacchus! from Die Entfhrung aus dem Serail.Won (8)[11][12]

Best Actor in a Leading Role (F. Murray Abraham)
Best Adapted Screenplay (Peter Shaffer)
Best Art Direction (Karel ern and Patrizia von Brandenstein)
Best Costume Design (Theodor Pitk)
Best Picture
Best Director (Milo Forman)
Best Makeup (Dick Smith and Paul LeBlanc)
Best Sound Mixing (Mark Berger, Thomas Scott, Todd Boekelheide and Christopher Newman)

Best Actor in a Leading Role (F. Murray Abraham)Best Adapted Screenplay (Peter Shaffer)Best Art Direction (Karel ern and Patrizia von Brandenstein)Best Costume Design (Theodor Pitk)Best PictureBest Director (Milo Forman)Best Makeup (Dick Smith and Paul LeBlanc)Best Sound Mixing (Mark Berger, Thomas Scott, Todd Boekelheide and Christopher Newman)Nominated

Best Actor in a Leading Role (Tom Hulce)
Best Cinematography (Miroslav Ondek)
Best Film Editing (Nena Danevic and Michael Chandler)

Best Actor in a Leading Role (Tom Hulce)Best Cinematography (Miroslav Ondek)Best Film Editing (Nena Danevic and Michael Chandler)Best Actor in a Leading Role (F. Murray Abraham)Best Adapted Screenplay (Peter Shaffer)Best Art Direction (Karel ern and Patrizia von Brandenstein)Best Costume Design (Theodor Pitk)Best PictureBest Director (Milo Forman)Best Makeup (Dick Smith and Paul LeBlanc)Best Sound Mixing (Mark Berger, Thomas Scott, Todd Boekelheide and Christopher Newman)Best Actor in a Leading Role (Tom Hulce)Best Cinematography (Miroslav Ondek)Best Film Editing (Nena Danevic and Michael Chandler)Won (4)

Best Actor  Motion Picture Drama (F. Murray Abraham)
Best Director (Milo Forman)
Best Motion Picture  Drama
Best Screenplay (Peter Shaffer)

Best Actor  Motion Picture Drama (F. Murray Abraham)Best Director (Milo Forman)Best Motion Picture  DramaBest Screenplay (Peter Shaffer)Nominated

Best Actor  Motion Picture Drama (Tom Hulce)
Best Supporting Actor  Motion Picture (Jeffrey Jones)

Best Actor  Motion Picture Drama (Tom Hulce)Best Supporting Actor  Motion Picture (Jeffrey Jones)Best Actor  Motion Picture Drama (F. Murray Abraham)Best Director (Milo Forman)Best Motion Picture  DramaBest Screenplay (Peter Shaffer)Best Actor  Motion Picture Drama (Tom Hulce)Best Supporting Actor  Motion Picture (Jeffrey Jones)Won (4)

Best Actor (F. Murray Abraham tied with Albert Finney for Under the Volcano)
Best Director (Milo Forman)
Best Picture
Best Screenplay (Peter Shaffer)

Best Actor (F. Murray Abraham tied with Albert Finney for Under the Volcano)Best Director (Milo Forman)Best PictureBest Screenplay (Peter Shaffer)Best Actor (F. Murray Abraham tied with Albert Finney for Under the Volcano)Best Director (Milo Forman)Best PictureBest Screenplay (Peter Shaffer)Won (1)

Best Edited Feature Film (Nena Danevic and Michael Chandler)

Best Edited Feature Film (Nena Danevic and Michael Chandler)Best Edited Feature Film (Nena Danevic and Michael Chandler)Won (1)

Best Casting for Feature Film (Mary Goldberg)

Best Casting for Feature Film (Mary Goldberg)Best Casting for Feature Film (Mary Goldberg)Won (1)

Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures (Milo Forman)

Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures (Milo Forman)Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures (Milo Forman)Won (1)

Best Actor (F. Murray Abraham)

Best Actor (F. Murray Abraham)Best Actor (F. Murray Abraham)Won (1)

AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  #53

AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  #53Nominated

AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Villain  Antonio Salieri


AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

Emperor Joseph II: "There are simply too many notes."


AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)

AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Villain  Antonio Salieri

Villain  Antonio SalieriAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

Emperor Joseph II: "There are simply too many notes."

Emperor Joseph II: "There are simply too many notes."AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  #53AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Villain  Antonio Salieri

Villain  Antonio SalieriAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

Emperor Joseph II: "There are simply too many notes."

Emperor Joseph II: "There are simply too many notes."AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)Villain  Antonio SalieriEmperor Joseph II: "There are simply too many notes."Won (4)

Best Cinematography (Miroslav Ondek)
Best Editing (Nena Danevic and Michael Chandler)
Best Make Up Artist (Dick Smith and Paul LeBlanc)
Best Sound (Mark Berger, Thomas Scott and Christopher Newman)

Best Cinematography (Miroslav Ondek)Best Editing (Nena Danevic and Michael Chandler)Best Make Up Artist (Dick Smith and Paul LeBlanc)Best Sound (Mark Berger, Thomas Scott and Christopher Newman)Nominated

Best Actor (F. Murray Abraham)
Best Costume Design (Theodor Pitk)
Best Film (Milo Forman and Saul Zaentz)
Best Production Design (Patrizia von Brandstein)
Best Screenplay Adapted (Peter Shaffer)

Best Actor (F. Murray Abraham)Best Costume Design (Theodor Pitk)Best Film (Milo Forman and Saul Zaentz)Best Production Design (Patrizia von Brandstein)Best Screenplay Adapted (Peter Shaffer)Best Cinematography (Miroslav Ondek)Best Editing (Nena Danevic and Michael Chandler)Best Make Up Artist (Dick Smith and Paul LeBlanc)Best Sound (Mark Berger, Thomas Scott and Christopher Newman)Best Actor (F. Murray Abraham)Best Costume Design (Theodor Pitk)Best Film (Milo Forman and Saul Zaentz)Best Production Design (Patrizia von Brandstein)Best Screenplay Adapted (Peter Shaffer)Won (3)

Best Director  Foreign Film (Milo Forman)
Best Foreign Actor (Tom Hulce)
Best Foreign Film

Best Director  Foreign Film (Milo Forman)Best Foreign Actor (Tom Hulce)Best Foreign FilmBest Director  Foreign Film (Milo Forman)Best Foreign Actor (Tom Hulce)Best Foreign FilmWon (2)

Best Actor Foreign Film (Tom Hulce)
Best Director Foreign Film (Milo Forman)

Best Actor Foreign Film (Tom Hulce)Best Director Foreign Film (Milo Forman)Best Actor Foreign Film (Tom Hulce)Best Director Foreign Film (Milo Forman)Won (1)

Best Foreign Film

Best Foreign FilmBest Foreign FilmWon (1)

Best Foreign Language Film

Best Foreign Language FilmBest Foreign Language FilmWon (1)

Best Foreign Feature Film

Best Foreign Feature FilmBest Foreign Feature FilmAmadeus at the Internet Movie DatabaseAmadeus at the TCM Movie DatabaseAmadeus at AllRoviAmadeus at Rotten TomatoesAmadeus at Box Office MojoAnalysis of Amadeus  the play and the filmAmadeus The script.All Quiet on the Western Front is a 1930 American war film based on the Erich Maria Remarque novel of the same name. It was directed by Lewis Milestone, and stars Louis Wolheim, Lew Ayres, John Wray, Arnold Lucy and Ben Alexander.All Quiet on the Western Front is considered a realistic and harrowing account of warfare in World War I, and was named #54 on the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies. However, it fell out of the top 100 in the AFI's 2007 revision. In June 2008, after polling over 1,500 workers in the creative community, AFI announced its 10 Top 10the ten best films in each of ten "classic" American film genres; All Quiet on the Western Front was ranked the seventh-best film in the epic genre.[2][3] In 1990, the film was selected and preserved by the United States Library of Congress' National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant." The film was the first to win the Academy Awards for both Outstanding Production and Best Director.[4]The film opens in a boys' high school in Germany at the beginning of World War I. The instructor, Kantorek, gives an impassioned speech about the glory of serving in the Army and "saving the Fatherland". Almost to a man, the young men are moved to join the army. The young enlistees are shown in basic training, aching for "action" fighting in the war. Their training officer (Himmelstoss, a strict disciplinarian who is hated by all the recruits) tells them to forget everything they know; they are going to become soldiers. Rigorous training diminishes the recruits' enthusiasm some, but after little more than marching drills, suddenly the boys' are told they are "going up front".The new soldiers arrive by train at the combat zone, which is mayhem, with soldiers everywhere, incoming shells, horse-drawn wagons racing about, and prolonged rain. One in the group is killed before the new recruits can reach their post, to the alarm of one of the new soldiers (Behm). The new soldiers are assigned to a unit composed of older soldiers, who are not exactly accommodating. The young soldiers find that there is no food available at the moment. They have not eaten since breakfast  but the men they have joined have not had food for two days. One of them (Katczinsky) had gone to locate something to eat and he returns with a slaughtered hog. The young soldiers "pay" for their dinner with cigarettes."For the Fatherland" the young soldiers' unit is sent out on night duty and they move into position packed into a flat cargo truck. As the driver drops them off at their destination, he tells them, "If there's any of you left, there will be someone here to pick you up in the morning." The young recruits watch the truck intensely as it leaves. Katczinsky gives the "schoolboys" some real world instructions, telling them how to deal with incoming shells, "When you see me flop, you flop. Only try to beat me to it." The unit strings up barbed-wire and tries to avoid shells. Flares light up the night sky as the enemy tries to spot them, machine guns hammer and a bombardment begins. Behm is killed by machine gun fire; most of the soldiers keep low in the trenches. Franz Kemmerich runs out to retrieve Behm, but, upon returning to the trench, realizes that he's carrying a corpse. He is scolded by Katczinsky for risking his life. When the truck arrives in the morning most of the unit has survived.Back at the bunker in the trenches, the soldiers play cards and fight off the rats who eat their food and gear. The young soldiers are showing signs of great stress: nightmares, shaking uncontrollably, and screaming about the unrelenting bombs. One recruit (Kemmerich) loses control, runs out of the trench and is injured. Some of the soldiers want to leave the trench and attack, but the enemy seems to have superior firepower. When food finally comes, the men have to fight to get their share. Then they are overcome by rats and the soldiers kill the rats with spades. Suddenly there is a break in the bombing and the men are ordered out to fight.A loud rumbling can be heard as the enemy approaches. The soldiers are in trenches with their rifles ready as incoming shells move closer and closer. They can do nothing but wait. The enemy French soldiers come into view, running toward the trenches, but the Germans hold their fire until the enemy is closer. Paul witnesses several soldiers die from shellfire. The Germans use machine gun fire, hand grenades and rifles to mow down the enemy. The enemy suffers great losses, but succeeds in entering the trenches, where hand-to-hand combat with bayonets begins. The Germans retreat to a second line, from where they launch a counterattack. At great cost they enter the French front line, but are unable to hold their position, and are ordered to withdraw to their original positions.The men of Second Company return from the battle and line up for a meal. The cook refuses to feed them because he wants the entire company to arrive. The men explain that this is all that is left of the company  80 of the original 150  and the cook refuses to give them all the food he has prepared. An argument follows and violence seems imminent when an officer arrives and orders the cook to give all the food to the menThe men start out eating greedily, but then settle into a satiated torpor. They hear that they are to return to the front the next day and begin a semi-serious discussion about the causes of the war and of wars in general. They speculate about whether geographical entities offend each other and whether these disagreements involve them. Tjaden speaks familiarly about himself and the Kaiser. They speculate about whether it is the Kaiser or the manufacturers that need the war or whether it is the result of a fever. Katczinsky suggests roping off a field and stripping the kings and their ministers down to their underwear and letting them fight it out with clubs. It is finally decided that they should go see their friend Kemmerich, who was wounded in the battle and is in a dressing station, and bring him his things.Five of the men find Kemmerich in a very bad condition, complaining that his watch was stolen while he was under ether, and that he is in pain in his right foot. Not realizing that Kemmerich did not know, Mueller lets slip that his right leg has been amputated; Kemmerich becomes upset. Kemmerich expresses regret that he would never become a forester and Paul tries to reassure him. Mueller sees Kemmerich's boots under the bed and tactlessly asks him for them. Kemmerich asks Paul to give his boots to Mueller and then loses consciousness. Paul tries to summon a doctor, but the doctor and the medic can do nothing. As Kemmerich finally succumbs to his wounds, Paul leaves the dressing station with Kemmerich's boots and breaks into a run. Mueller is trying to talk about math to Katczinsky when Paul brings him the boots. Mueller is pleased and says that he will not mind returning to the front in such fine boots. Paul describes how he reacted to Kemmerich's death by running and how it made him feel more alive and then hungry.In a sequence of battle scenes, Mueller is wounded and his boots are passed on to another soldier, who is also wounded and presumed killed. One day Corporal Himmelstoss arrives to the front and is immediately spurned because of his bad reputation. In an attack on a cemetery, Paul stabs a French soldier, but finds himself trapped in a hole with the dying man in for an entire night. Throughout the night, he desperately tries to help him, bringing him water, but fails miserably to stop him from dying. He cries bitterly and begs the dead body to speak so he can be forgiven. Later, he returns to the German lines.Then the company have a day off the front line, and soon everyone gets drunk and eats as much as they can. While washing in the river, the men catch the attention of French women who invite them in their house at night.Going back to the front line, Paul is severely wounded and taken to a Catholic hospital, along with his good friend Albert Kropp. Kropp's leg is amputated, but he does not find out until some time afterwards. Around this time, Paul is taken to the bandaging ward, from which, according to its reputation, nobody has ever returned alive; but he later returns to the normal rooms triumphantly, only to find Kropp in agony.Earning a furlough, Paul then takes a brief trip back to his home, where he finds his mother is ailing. The people in his town are mindlessly patriotic and ignorant about what is happening at the front. He visits Kantorek, only to find him lecturing another class about the "glory of war." Disgusted, he returns to the front, where only a few men of the Second Company have survived, including an old hand, Tjaden. Paul asks Tjaden about Katczinsky, thinking that he is dead, but Tjaden reveals that Katczinsky is still alive. Paul goes looking for Kat, finds him scrounging for food, to no avail. Kat is wounded in the ankle by a bomb dropped from an airplane. So Paul decides to carry Kat to the field hospital. En route, though, the same plane drops another bomb, and the shrapnel from this explosion kills Kat, while Paul, in ignorance, continues to carry him to the field hospital. Paul is grief-stricken.In the final scene, Paul is back on the front lines. He pats each of the young soldiers arms as he and his fellow comrades were patted in the beginning of the movie. He sees a butterfly just beyond his trench. Paul stands up from his crouched position in the trench to get a better look, but becoming too exposed, he is shot and killed by an enemy sniper.In the film, Paul is shot while trying to draw a butterfly just outside his trench. The scene was shot during the editing phase, so the actors were no longer available and Milestone had to use his own hand as Paul's.Noted comedienne Zasu Pitts was originally cast as Paul's mother and completed the film but preview audiences, used to seeing her in comic roles, laughed when she appeared onscreen so Milestone re-shot her scenes with Beryl Mercer before the film was released. The preview audience remains the only one who saw Pitts in the role, although she does appear for about 30 seconds in the film's original preview trailer.The film was shot with two cameras side by side, with one negative edited as a sound film and the other edited as a silent film for international distribution.A great number of German Army veterans were living in Los Angeles at the time of filming and were recruited as bit players and technical advisers. Around 2,000 extras were utilized during production.[5] Among them was future director Fred Zinnemann, who was fired for impudence.The film got tremendous praise in the United States, but there would be controversy over the film's subject matter in other places, including Europe.On its release, Variety wrote:Some of the credit for the film's success has been ascribed to the direction of Lewis Milestone:Due to its anti-war and perceived anti-German messages, Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party banned the film from Germany in the 1930s and early 1940s. During its brief run in German cinemas in the early 1930s, the Nazis disrupted the viewings by releasing rats in the theaters.[8]Also, between the period of 1928 to 1941, this was one of many films to be banned in Australia by the Chief Censor Creswell O'Reilly. The film was also banned in Italy in 1929, Austria in 1931, with the prohibition officially raised only in the 1980s, and in France up to 1963.[9]The silent version, restored by the Library of Congress, premiered on Turner Classic Movies on Sept. 28, 2011.192930 Academy AwardsIt was the first talkie war film to win Oscars.Other wins:American Film Institute recognitionApril 21, 1930(1930-04-21)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Releases5 Awards and honors6 See also7 Notes8 External linksRichard Alexander as WesthusBen Alexander as Franz KemmerichLew Ayres as Paul BumerWilliam Bakewell as Albert KroppEdmund Breese as Herr MeyerG. Pat Collins as Lieutenant BertinckOwen Davis, Jr. as PeterRussell Gleason as MllerHarold Goodwin as DeteringScott Kolk as LeerArnold Lucy as Professor KantorekBeryl Mercer as Mrs. Bumer, Paul's motherWalter E. Rogers as BehnSlim Summerville as TjadenLouis Wolheim as Stanislaus KatczinskyJohn Wray as HimmelstossArthur Gardner as classroom student; the last living member of the cast or crewUniversal re-released the film in 1939. It contained anti-Nazi announcements read out throughout the film in a March of Time style; yet the aim was to remind people of the horrors of wars in a time of international unrest.Later re-releases by Universal International were substantially cut and the film's ending scored with new music against the wishes of director Lewis Milestone.[6] Before his death in 1980, Milestone requested Universal fully restore the film with the removal of the end music cue. Two decades later, Milestone's wishes were finally granted when the United States Library of Congress undertook an exhaustive restoration of the film, which is vastly superior in sound and picture quality to most other existent prints.1930 Photoplay Medal of Honor - Carl Laemmle Jr.1931 Kinema Junpo Award for Best Foreign Language Film - Sound to Lewis Milestone1990 National Film RegistryAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #54AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills - Nominated[10]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"And our bodies are earth. And our thoughts are clay. And we sleep and eat with death." - Nominated[11]

"And our bodies are earth. And our thoughts are clay. And we sleep and eat with death." - Nominated[11]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - Nominated[12]AFI's 10 Top 10 - #7 Epic film"And our bodies are earth. And our thoughts are clay. And we sleep and eat with death." - Nominated[11]All Quiet on the Western Front (1979 film)All Quiet on the Western Front at the Internet Movie DatabaseAll Quiet on the Western Front at the TCM Movie DatabaseAll Quiet on the Western Front at AllRoviAll Quiet on the Western Front at Rotten TomatoesTwo speeches from the film in text, audio, video from AmericanRhetoric.comRodgers and Hammerstein's The Sound of Music is a 1965 American musical film directed by Robert Wise and starring Julie Andrews and Christopher Plummer. The film is based on the Broadway musical The Sound of Music, with songs written by Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II, and with the musical book written by the writing team of Howard Lindsay and Russel Crouse and screenplay written by Ernest Lehman. The musical originated with the book The Story of the Trapp Family Singers by Maria von Trapp. It contains many popular songs, including "Edelweiss", "My Favorite Things", "Climb Ev'ry Mountain", "Do-Re-Mi", "Sixteen Going on Seventeen", and "The Lonely Goatherd", as well as the title song.The movie version was filmed on location in Salzburg, Austria; Bavaria in Southern Germany; and at the 20th Century Fox Studios in California. It was photographed in 70mm Todd-AO format by Ted D. McCord. It won a total of five Academy Awards including Best Picture and displaced Gone with the Wind as the highest-grossing film of all-time. The cast album was also nominated for a Grammy Award for Album of the Year.In 2001, the United States Library of Congress selected the film for preservation in the National Film Registry as it was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".Maria (Julie Andrews) is found in a pasture, exulting in the musical inspiration she finds there (The Sound of Music). Maria is a postulant in Nonnberg Abbey, where she is constantly getting into mischief and is the nuns' despair ("Maria").Maria's life suddenly changes when a widowed Austrian Navy Captain, Georg von Trapp (Christopher Plummer) writes to the abbey asking for a governess for his seven children. Mother Abbess asks Maria to take the position on a probationary basis; previous governesses, though, have not lasted long. She is worried about what awaits her at the von Trapp household, but is determined to succeed ("I Have Confidence").Maria, upon arrival at the von Trapp estate, finds that the Captain keeps it in strict shipshape order, blows a whistle, issues orders, and dresses his children in sailor-suit uniforms. While they are initially hostile to her, they warm to her when she comforts them during a thunderstorm (My Favorite Things). Liesl (Charmian Carr), the oldest, who is "Sixteen Going on Seventeen", sneaks into Maria's window after a secret meeting with a messenger boy, Rolfe (Daniel Truhitte). At first she is adamant that she "doesn't need a governess", but Maria offers to be her friend, and she acquiesces. Maria teaches them how to sing ("Do-Re-Mi") and to play, sewing playclothes for them from discarded drapes in her room.The Captain entertains a visit from a lady friend, Baroness Elsa Schroeder (Eleanor Parker), a wealthy socialite from Vienna, along with mutual friend Max Detweiler (Richard Haydn), who is intent on finding an obscure musical act to launch at the upcoming Salzburg Music Festival. The Captain becomes aware that Maria has been taking the children on picnics and bicycle rides, climbed trees with them, and taken them in a boat on the lake adjoining his estate. When the boat capsizes, Maria and all of the children (wearing their clothes made from the former curtains) fall into the water. The Captain turns his wrath on her and Maria begs him to pay attention to the children and love them, but he orders her to return to the abbey.When he discovers the children performing a reprise of "The Sound of Music" for the Baroness, he changes his mind. Maria has brought music back into his home, and he begs her to stay. Things get better at the household. She and the children perform a puppet show ("The Lonely Goatherd") that Max gave to them. He announces that he has entered the children in the Salzburg Festival; the Captain, however, forbids their participation. Maria and the children insist that he sing a song, knowing that he used to play and sing with a guitar, and he agrees ("Edelweiss").At a soiree thrown in Baroness Schroeder's honor, eleven-year-old Kurt (Duane Chase) observes guests dancing the Laendler, and asks Maria to teach him the steps. The Captain cuts in and partners her in a graceful performance, culminating in a close clinch. At that moment, she breaks off and blushes. The children perform "So Long, Farewell" to say goodnight to the guests, receiving enthusiastic applause. The Baroness, jealous of Maria, convinces her to return to Nonnberg.Maria leaves the estate and returns to the abbey, where she keeps herself in seclusion until Mother Abbess gently confronts her, urging her to "Climb Ev'ry Mountain" in search of God's will for her. At this command, she returns to the von Trapp family, finding that the Captain is now engaged to the Baroness. However, he breaks off the engagement, realizing that he is in love with Maria. He meets Maria in his gazebo and they declare their love for each other. The Captain and Maria share a kiss for romance ("Something Good"). The two wed in an elaborate ceremony at the Salzburg Cathedral, with many of Austria's elite, as well as the nuns from Nonnberg Abbey, in attendance.While the new couple is away on their honeymoon in Paris, Max grooms the children to perform in the Salzburg Music Festival, against the Captain's wishes. At the same time, Austria is annexed into the Third Reich in the Anschluss (actual date was March 12, 1938). When the Captain returns, he is informed that he must report as soon as possible to the Nazi Naval Headquarters in Bremerhaven, to accept a commission in the German Navy. He is opposed to Nazism, and stalls by insisting he must perform with his family that night in the Salzburg Festival, now politicized and showcased as a Nazi event under the patronage of Hans Zeller (Ben Wright), recently appointed as the Nazi Gauleiter. Zeller agrees, but orders the Captain to depart immediately after the performance. The choreography of the final song, "So Long, Farewell", allows the family to leave slowly, a few at a time, and as the winners are announced, they flee. At first they hide in the abbey, but are discovered by Rolfe (who had joined the Nazi party), who threatens to shoot the Captain despite being visibly scared of having to do so. The Captain unsuccessfully attempts to persuade Rolfe to join them; he calls for his lieutenant instead, and the von Trapps flee again. The Nazis are unable to pursue them, as the nuns have removed the spark plug wires and ignition coils from their cars. The final shot shows the von Trapps climbing over the Alps into Switzerland, as "Climb Ev'ry Mountain", reprised by a choir, swells to a conclusion.Darryl and Richard D. Zanuck originally asked Robert Wise to do the film, but he turned it down because it was "too saccharine". They then approached Stanley Donen, Vincent Donehue, Gene Kelly, and George Roy Hill, but they all turned it down.[3] Zanuck next asked William Wyler to direct the film. Because he was suffering from a loss of hearing that affected his ability to appreciate music fully, Wyler felt he was the wrong man for the job, but he agreed to fly to New York and see the Broadway production. Feeling many of the songs did not evolve organically from the plot, he remained undecided and wrote to the producer of Die Trapp-Familie, a 1956 non-musical film about the von Trapps starring famous German screen star Ruth Leuwerik, to ask his advice. "This cannot fail," he responded, and Wyler accepted the assignment.[4]Wyler had seen the original Broadway production of My Fair Lady and had been impressed by Julie Andrews, who was in the process of filming Mary Poppins. He met with her on the set and asked Walt Disney if he could see some of the dailies. Convinced she was perfect for the role of Maria, he signed her to a contract.[4]Wyler returned to New York and met with Maria von Trapp, then he and screenwriter Ernest Lehman and their wives flew to Austria to begin scouting locations in the Tyrolean Alps. There they visited the convent where von Trapp had been a novice, and Wyler discussed the possibility of filming scenes there with the Mother Superior. He then met with the mayor of Salzburg. Wyler was concerned that the presence of a film crew shooting German troops parading before buildings draped with the Nazi flag would be a harsh reminder of the Anschluss for those who had experienced it. The mayor assured him the residents had managed to live through it the first time and would survive it again.[4]Wyler returned to Hollywood and began pre-production work on the film, but his wife realized his heart clearly was not in it. Then he was approached by Jud Kinberg and John Kohn, neophyte film producers who had purchased the rights to the John Fowles novel The Collector prior to its publication. They had a commitment from Terence Stamp to star in the film and a first draft screenplay by Stanley Mann. Wyler was impressed with the script and, feeling an affinity with the project he did not with The Sound of Music, he asked the Zanucks to release him from his contract. They agreed, and Robert Wise, who became available due to delays in production of The Sand Pebbles, was hired to replace Wyler.[3][4]Darby Hinton was to audition as one of the Von Trapp children in this musical film, but unintentionally got lost and wandered into the wrong line of kids. By the time his mother found him, he had turned in his lederhosen for a coonskin cap, and ended up portraying Israel Boone, on Daniel Boone for the next six years.Both the musical and the film present a history of the von Trapp family, albeit one that is not completely accurate. The following are examples of the dramatic license taken by the filmmakers:The inaccuracies between the true story and the theatre and film depictions cannot be blamed on the von Trapps themselves. They had given up the rights to their story to a German producer in the 1950s who then sold them to American producers. The von Trapps had little if any input into the subsequent musical and film. Maria in fact was reportedly quite upset with the portrayal of her husband as a humorless taskmaster."[7]The opening scene and aerial shots were filmed in Anif (Anif Palace), Mondsee, and Salzkammergut (Fuschl am See, St. Gilgen and Saint Wolfgang).[8]Hohenwerfen Castle served as the main backdrop for the song "Do-Re-Mi". At the Mirabell Gardens in Salzburg, Maria and the children sing "Do-Re-Mi", dancing around the horse fountain and using the steps as a musical scale.All songs have music by Richard Rodgers and lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein II unless otherwise noted. Instrumental underscore passages were adapted by Irwin Kostal."Edelweiss", thought by some to be a traditional Austrian song or even the Austrian national anthem, was written expressly for the musical by Rodgers and Hammerstein. Originally unknown in Austria, it has been promoted heavily there ever since, especially in Salzburg.[citation needed]The songs "How Can Love Survive?", "An Ordinary Couple", and "No Way to Stop It" were not used in the film version. The omission of those songs had to be approved through Richard Rodgers.[citation needed]There were four extra children singing with the main ones to add more effect to their voices, including Darleen Carr, Charmian Carr's younger sister. However, these were uncredited. Darleen Carr sang Kurt's high voice, during the reprise and "sad" versions of the title song, as well as the high "Bye" in the song "So Long, Farewell", and later for Gretl in its reprise towards the end of the film.[citation needed]The film premiered March 2, 1965, in the United States, briefly displacing Gone with the Wind as the highest-grossing film of all-time;[10] taking re-releases into account, it ultimately grossed $286 million internationally.[1] Adjusted to contemporary prices it is the third highest-grossing film of all-time at the North American box office, behind Gone with the Wind and Star Wars.[11]The soundtrack album on the RCA Victor label has sold over 11 million copies worldwide, and has never been out of print. The soundtrack album was included in the stockpile of records held in 20 underground radio stations of Great Britain's Wartime Broadcasting Service, designed to provide public information and morale-boosting broadcasts for 100 days after a nuclear attack.[12][13]Despite the enormous popularity of the movie, most critics were unimpressed.[14][unbalanced opinion] Walter Kerr of the New York Herald Tribune had written the one negative review of the stage musical by calling it "not only too sweet for words but almost too sweet for music"; similarly, noted film critic Pauline Kael blasted the film by calling it "the sugar-coated lie people seem to want to eat," and "we have been turned into emotional and aesthetic imbeciles when we hear ourselves humming the sickly, goody-goody songs."[15] This review allegedly led to Kael's dismissal from McCall's magazine.[15][16]Controversy surrounded the film's release in Germany and Austria, where the film had to compete with the much-loved Die Trapp-Familie (1956), which provided the original inspiration for the Broadway musical, and its sequel Die Trapp-Familie in Amerika (1958), which are regarded in German-speaking Europe as the authoritative von Trapp story. According to a 1994 documentary titled From Fact to Phenomenon: The Real Story of the von Trapp Family Singers, which was narrated by Claire Bloom and included on the 30th Anniversary Laserdisc box set of the film, "...the film's Nazi overtones brought about the unauthorized cutting of the entire third act," which begins directly after Maria's wedding to the Captain and contains images of post-Anschluss Austria. This version, ending at the church altar, did passably well at the box office, but when the American studio forced the third act to be restored to the German release, audience attendance plummeted. Austrian filmgoers in particular resented the way Naziism in their country was depicted. Other offenses in the Austrians' eyes were the way the family's kindly manager, Father Wasner, was transformed into a sleazy huckster; changing the family's genre of music into show tunes; and a contrived (and fictional) climactic flight over the mountains to Switzerland, which does not border Salzburg. As a result, in Austria and Germany the movie is widely ignored.[17]The Sound of Music is credited as the film that saved 20th Century Fox, after high production costs and low revenue for Cleopatra which nearly bankrupted the studio.[16]The first American television airing was on ABC on February 29, 1976 to record ratings. The film wasn't seen on TV again until NBC acquired the broadcast rights. NBC's first telecast of the film was on February 11, 1979.[18] NBC continued to air it annually for twenty years, often preempting regular programming. During most of its run on NBC, the film was heavily edited to fit a three-hour time slot (approximately 140 minutes without commercials). The 30 minutes of edits, which bewildered those familiar with the complete film included: portions of the "Morning Hymn/Alleluia", sung by the nuns; part of dialogue scene in abbey between Mother Abbess and Maria; part of Liesl and Rolf's dialogue preceding "Sixteen Going on Seventeen"; Liesl's verse of "Edelweiss" sung with the Captain; the Captain and Baroness waltzing at the party, and many more dialogue cuts within existing scenes.Starting in 1995, the movie aired in an uncut form on NBC (on April 9, 1995, minus the entr'acte). Julie Andrews hosted the four-hour telecast which presented the musical numbers in a letterbox format. As the film's home video availability cut into its TV ratings, NBC let their contract lapse at the turn of the 21st century. In 2001 it had a one time airing on the Fox network, again in its heavily-edited 140-minute version. Since 2002 it has aired on ABC (generally between Christmas and New Years), and periodically (generally around Easter and other holidays) on its sister cable network, ABC Family, where its most recent runs have been the full version in a four-hour time slot, complete with the entr'acte. ABC first broadcast an HD resolution version on December 28, 2008. Canada's CTV also put the movie in a four hour time slot broadcast during the holidays.In the UK, the first television airing was on BBC1, on Christmas Day, 1978 at 4.20pm.The film has been released on VHS, Laserdisc, and DVD numerous times. It made its DVD debut on August 29, 2000 in commemoration of its 35th Anniversary. The film is often included in box sets with other Rodgers & Hammerstein film adaptations. A 40th anniversary DVD, with "making of" documentaries and special features, was released in 2005. The film made its debut issue on Blu-ray Disc on November 2, 2010, for its 45th anniversary.[19][20] For the Blu-ray release, the original 70mm negatives were rescanned at 8k resolution, giving the most detailed copy of the film seen thus far.Sing-A-Long Sound of Music revival screenings began in London, where the audience was encouraged to sing along to lyrics superimposed on the screen. Following a successful run there, the film began a successful run in New York in 2000.[21] Audiences would dress in costume and hold contests at screenings. The revival continued to tour globally following the New York run.The film was nominated for ten Academy Awards, winning in five categories.[22]Nominated for four categories, winning in two [23]It has been in included in numerous "Top 100" lists from the American Film Institute including:Every year starting in 2005, the Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles holds an annual Sound of Music sing-a-long, where the film is played with lyrics underneath the screen. The real Von Trapp children and the actors who played them in the film have made appearances at this event. Called "The Rocky Horror Picture Show on Prozac", it has sold out every year since its inception.The song "The Sound of Music" was used in the movie Moulin Rouge!, in the green fairy sequence featuring Kylie Minogue, who later used the recording in her 2002 and 2009 tours.On October 28, 2010, both Julie Andrews and Christopher Plummer who portrayed the Captain and Maria, and the seven former child stars from the film appeared together for the first time since the film's release on The Oprah Winfrey Show during the final season, in honor of the film's 45th anniversary.1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Historical accuracy5 Songs6 Release

6.1 Theatrical
6.2 Television and home video
6.3 Sing-A-Long Sound of Music

6.1 Theatrical6.2 Television and home video6.3 Sing-A-Long Sound of Music7 Accolades

7.1 Academy Awards
7.2 Golden Globe Awards
7.3 AFI recognition
7.4 Legacy

7.1 Academy Awards7.2 Golden Globe Awards7.3 AFI recognition7.4 Legacy8 References9 Bibliography10 External links6.1 Theatrical6.2 Television and home video6.3 Sing-A-Long Sound of Music7.1 Academy Awards7.2 Golden Globe Awards7.3 AFI recognition7.4 LegacyJulie Andrews as Maria von Trapp, a free-spirited young Austrian woman, studying to become a nun. Due to her often singing and running seeming somewhat out of place in the abbey, Mother Abbess sends her to the nearby city of Salzburg to be governess to the seven children of Captain von Trapp. Although initially hostile toward her, they come to love her through her introducing the joys of music and singing, and she develops a special relationship with Liesl, the eldest. Throughout the film, the Captain grows closer to both her and his children through the reintroduction of music, and she falls in love with him. Fearful of how returning his affections might seem in God's eyes (as she is the children's governess), she goes back to the abbey, but is convinced to return and see what her love might bring. Eventually, the Captain admits his feelings for her, and they marry. However, the Third Reich is taking power via the Anschluss, prompting her and her new family to leave Austria. Julie Andrews was famously nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress, however, she lost it to another Julie: Julie Christie.Christopher Plummer as Captain Georg von Trapp, a veteran Austrian navy captain whose wife died, leaving behind their seven children. He extends his military background into raising them, at first represented as a strict disciplinarian. However, his attitude toward both the children and Maria softens considerably after she reintroduces music into the family. He is courting Baroness Elsa Schroeder throughout the film, and becomes engaged to her, but they call it off, and he proclaims his love to Maria, marrying her instead. He firmly believes in Austrian independence, proudly displaying the Austrian flag and tearing down the Nazi one, as well as refusing to join them. He, Maria, and the children leave Austria at the end of the film by crossing the Alps to Switzerland. His singing voice was dubbed by Bill Lee.Richard Haydn as Max Detweiler, a good friend of both the Baroness and the Captain, and an impresario. In searching Salzburg for talented singers, he finds what he wants in the von Trapp family, and constantly tries to convince the Captain to let him enter the children in the Salzburg Music Festival. He is also somewhat neutral when it comes to the Third Reich, seeking only to make a good and honest living regardless of who was in power. Although he doesn't like or approve of the Anschluss, he is more willing than the Captain to let it quietly take place. Nevertheless, due to their close friendship, he helps them escape during the festival at his own expense.Eleanor Parker as Baroness Elsa Schroeder, the Captain's lady friend from Vienna, and later fiance for a short period. She becomes jealous of Maria's talent, and convinces her to leave during a grand party at the house by exploiting her inner conflict about becoming a nun and her discomfort at the Captain's obvious affection towards her. He announces their engagement to the children, but she doesn't go over well with them. After Maria's return, he confesses to her that he is being unfair to her. Seeing the marriage wouldn't work, she gives her blessings to him and "No Way to Stop It" were not used in the film.Charmian Carr as Liesl von Trapp, the first and eldest child, sixteen "going on seventeen". She believes she doesn't need a governess at first, but soon comes to trust Maria. She is in love with a messenger named Rolfe, who delivers their telegrams. However, he changes after joining the Nazis, no longer caring for her. She seeks advice from Maria about this, who tells her to "wait a year or two" to find love. She is shocked to see that he is one of the search party, and begs him to stop and let them escape.Nicholas Hammond as Friedrich von Trapp, the second child, fourteen. He is very quiet and is also something of a gentleman, despite his involvement in the tricks against the previous governesses, which the children confess were merely to get the Captain's attention. After Maria arrives, he tells her that he "is impossible" according to "Fraulein Josephine: four governesses ago".Heather Menzies as Louisa von Trapp, the third child, thirteen. She and Brigitta are often together, and she is a bit of a daydreamer. Her two favorite tricks on governesses are to fill their beds with spiders and pretend that she is one of the other girls, such as Brigitta.Duane Chase as Kurt von Trapp, the fourth child, eleven. He often tries to act manly and is outspoken against the previous governesses and often questions Maria about things, once trying to learn an Austrian folk dance.Angela Cartwright as Brigitta von Trapp, the fifth child, ten. She is very sharp-witted, honest, somewhat nonconformist, and not afraid to speak her mind about things (e.g., Maria's dress being ugly). Brigitta also reads books as she first appears.Debbie Turner as Marta von Trapp, the sixth child, seven. She gets along well with Maria, sharing her love of pink and being the first to like her. She once mentions a pink parasol as her birthday gift.Kym Karath as Gretl von Trapp, the seventh and youngest child, five. She speaks very little, and is often shy. As the other children tell Maria to adopt questionable behaviors and practices, she tells her, as her first phrase in the film, "Don't you believe a word they say, Fraulein Maria, because I like you." In real life, she could not swim. When the boat capsized in the water, she had to be lifted up by a couple of people that were hidden under it. During one rehearsal, she threw up after swallowing some of the water.Peggy Wood as Mother Abbess, the head of Nonnberg Abbey, who convinces Maria to leave there and explore life as a governess for a while. When she returns, she has her explain why she left and realizes she is in love, and convinces her to return and face her problems, to see what might come of this love. This proves to be good advice, as she later marries the Captain. Mother Abbess also shelters her and her family while they are hiding from the Nazis and helps them escape to Switzerland. Peggy Wood was nominated for Best Supporting Actress at the Oscars for her performance. Her singing voice was dubbed by Margery McKay. She is often referred to by the other nuns as 'The Reverend Mother'.Anna Lee as Sister Margaretta, a nun who looks fondly on Maria. She, as well as Sister Berthe, helps her to escape by sabotaging the cars of the Gauleiter and his soldiers.Portia Nelson as Sister Berthe, a nun who doesn't believe Maria belongs in the abbey; she nevertheless helps her escape by sabotaging the cars of the Gauleiter and his soldiers.Marni Nixon as Sister Sophia. She appeared on screen first telling her opinion to the nuns about Maria and then singing for herself. She was cast in the role by director Robert Wise. In the DVD commentary to the film, he comments that audiences were finally able to see the woman whose voice they knew so well.Daniel Truhitte as Rolfe, a messenger who is in love with Liesl. The two become estranged after his enthusiasm for the Nazi cause leads him to forsake Liesl, partly as he realises that her father does not support Adolf Hitler's Third Reich and thus has no regard for him. He subtly warns the von Trapps about the danger they face for not obeying the summons of the Reich. At the end, though he pulls a gun on Captain von Trapp, he does not have the nerve to shoot him.Ben Wright as Herr Zeller, Gauleiter, an enthusiast for the Third Reich and the Anschluss, and the main antagonist of the film. He is oppositional against the Captain as early on as the party held for the Baroness. After the Anschluss he is appointed Gauleiter of the region and informs Max that Georg will be expected to take up his 'proper position in the new order', which, we later find out, is to serve in the German Navy. Through the intervention of the abbey and the festival, the von Trapps ultimately elude his grasp.The famous marionette puppet sequence for the song "The Lonely Goatherd" was produced and performed by the leading puppeteers of the day, Bil Baird and Cora Eisenberg-Baird.Best Picture (Won)Best Director  Robert Wise (Won)Best Actress in a Leading Role  Julie Andrews (Nomination)Best Actress in a Supporting Role  Peggy Wood (Nomination)Best Art Direction (Nomination)Best Costume Design (Nomination)Best Sound (James Corcoran, Fred Hynes) (Won)Best Scoring of Music  Adaptation or Treatment (Won)Best Cinematography (Nomination)Best Film Editing (Won)Best Motion Picture  Musical or Comedy (Won)Best Actress in a Motion Picture  Musical or Comedy  Julie Andrews (Won)Best Director of a Motion Picture (Nomination)Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture  Peggy Wood (Nomination)AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  No. 55AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions  No. 27AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Maria Von Trapp  Nominated Hero[24]

Maria Von Trapp  Nominated Hero[24]AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs:

"The Sound of Music"  No. 10
"My Favorite Things"  No. 64
"Do-Re-Mi"  No. 88

"The Sound of Music"  No. 10"My Favorite Things"  No. 64"Do-Re-Mi"  No. 88AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers  No. 41AFI's 100 Years of Musicals  No. 4AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  No. 40Maria Von Trapp  Nominated Hero[24]"The Sound of Music"  No. 10"My Favorite Things"  No. 64"Do-Re-Mi"  No. 88Hirsch, Julia Antopol (1993). The Sound of Music: The making of America's favorite movie. Chicago: Contemporary Books. ISBN0-8092-3837-3.Maslon, Laurence (2007). The Sound of Music Companion. New York: Fireside. ISBN1-4165-4954-4.The Sound of Music at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Sound of Music at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Sound of Music at AllRoviThe Sound of Music at Box Office MojoThe Sound of Music at Rotten Tomatoes'The Sound of Music' history at RNHOriginal NY Times reviewThe Sound of Music album at Discogs (list of releases)The Sound Of Music: Salzburg 19642011MASH (stylized as M*A*S*H on the film's poster and art) is a 1970 American satirical black comedy film directed by Robert Altman and written by Ring Lardner, Jr., based on Richard Hooker's novel MASH: A Novel About Three Army Doctors. It is the only feature film in the M*A*S*H franchise. It became one of the biggest films of the early 1970s for 20th Century Fox.The film depicts a unit of medical personnel stationed at a Mobile Army Surgical Hospital (MASH) during the Korean War; however, the subtext is really about the Vietnam War.[4] It stars Donald Sutherland, Tom Skerritt and Elliott Gould, with Sally Kellerman, Robert Duvall, Rene Auberjonois, Roger Bowen, and, in his film debut, football player Fred Williamson. The film inspired the popular and critically acclaimed television series M*A*S*H, which ran from 1972 to 1983.In Autumn 1951, the 4077th Mobile Army Surgical Hospital is assigned two replacements: Captain "Hawkeye" Pierce (Donald Sutherland) and Captain "Duke" Forrest (Tom Skerritt). On their arrival, it becomes clear that they are rebellious, womanizing, mischievous rule-breakers (they arrive having "borrowed" a Jeep, and immediately begin flirting with the nursing staff), but they soon prove good at their jobs. They immediately clash with their new tent mate Major Frank Burns (Robert Duvall), who is both a religious man and an inferior surgeon. Hawkeye and Duke put pressure on Lt. Colonel Henry Blake (Roger Bowen), the unit's CO, to have Burns removed from "their" tent. At the same time, they ask him to apply to have a specialist thoracic surgeon assigned to the 4077th.The mysterious new thoracic surgeon arrives, and gives away little about who he is or where he's from. Hawkeye, though, is convinced he has seen the new man somewhere before. It is only after an impromptu football game that Hawkeye recalls a college football game he played in which he scored the only touchdown by intercepting a pass from the opposing team's (Dartmouth) quarterback, the new thoracic surgeon, Captain "Trapper" John McIntyre (Elliott Gould).Major Margaret Houlihan (Sally Kellerman), the newly assigned chief nurse of the camp, arrives to be greeted by Henry Blake (who mistakenly refers to her as "O'Houlihan" several times). At the same time, in the post-op ward Trapper sees Frank Burns unjustly blaming Private Boone, an orderly, for a patient's death. During Houlihan's tour of the camp, Trapper confronts Burns and punches him.While Henry is away visiting General Hammond at the 325th Evac Hospital, the camp, led by Trapper, lets loose. Burns and Houlihan are appalled and write a report on the unmilitary goings-on. In the process, they give in to their own repressed passions and engage in a sexual encounter. But their tryst is broadcast over the PA system, and everyone hears Houlihan telling Burns to "Kiss my hot lips!"  earning her the nickname "Hot Lips". The following day, Hawkeye quietly taunts Burns about the encounter, goading Burns to attack him. Burns is then sedated, restrained and shipped back stateside.Father Mulcahy, also called "Dago Red" (Ren Auberjonois), the camp's chaplain, tells Hawkeye that "Painless Pole" Waldowski (John Schuck), the unit's dentist, has consulted him about a problem. Though Mulcahy feels unable to divulge any details (Waldowski had come to him in confession), he makes clear the severity of the problem. Waldowski tells Hawkeye that he has suffered a "lack of performance" with a visiting nurse and now believes he has latent homosexual tendencies. Soon after, he reveals his desire to commit suicide and seeks advice on which method to use. Hawkeye, Trapper and Duke suggest that he use the "black capsule" (a fictitious, fast-acting poison). At an impromptu Last Supper, Painless takes the capsule (actually a sleeping pill) and falls asleep in a coffin to the strains of "Suicide is Painless". Hawkeye then persuades Lt. Maria "Dish" Schneider (Jo Ann Pflug), a nurse who is returning to the U.S. the following day, to spend the night with Painless and cure him of his problems.During a discussion, Duke announces that he is partial to blondes, to which Hawkeye responds by claiming his friend has a thing for Hot Lips. Duke counters by suggesting she isn't even a natural blonde and bets $20 with Hawkeye to find out. Together, the boys come up with a scheme: when the nurses are going to use the showers, all are waylaid except Hot Lips. Then, on cue, the flap covering the shower tent is lifted to expose Hot Lips, naked, to the camp, plunging her into complete and total humiliation. Duke then tells Hawkeye that Hawkeye owes him $20 (implying that her pubic hair is not blonde).In hysterics, Hot Lips storms off to Colonel Blake and screams at him that the camp is an insane asylum and that it's his fault for letting the doctors get away with practically anything. She threatens to resign her commission if Blake doesn't turn Duke and Hawkeye over to the MPs. Blake, who is listening to Houlihan's diatribe while lying in bed with nurse Leslie (Indus Arthur), finally tells Houlihan, "Well goddamn it, Hot Lips, resign your goddamn commission". Houlihan dejectedly turns and leaves, sobbing "My commission, my commission."Ho-Jon (Kim Atwood), a local teenager who works in the camp, is drafted into the South Korean army. Hawkeye drives him to the induction center in Seoul for his physical, where he is found to have high blood pressure and a rapid heartbeat. The examining doctor refuses to disqualify Ho-Jon, insinuating that Hawkeye may have given Ho-Jon some medicine to induce these symptoms and keep him from being conscripted. Hawkeye reluctantly has to let him go.Back in camp, Trapper is ordered to proceed to Kokura, Japan, to operate on the GI son of a U.S. Congressman who has been injured in training. Seeing an opportunity to play golf, he takes Hawkeye to assist. The two barge into the hospital and order the young man into surgery within the hour. With Hawkeye's old friend "Me Lay" Marston (Michael Murphy) as the anaesthetist, they quickly finish the surgery; but on the way out of the hospital, they are cornered by the MPs and escorted to the hospital's commander, Col. Wallace Merrill. Reminding him that "the Pros from Dover" have bailed him out of a potential situation with the Congressman's son, any threats that Merrill could make are effectively nullified.While recuperating at the Dr. Yamachi's New Era Hospital and Whorehouse where Me Lay moonlights as a doctor, Hawkeye and Trapper come across a Japanese-American baby with a serious medical problem. Taking advantage of their status as "the Pros from Dover", they go to the military hospital to operate, but are stopped by Merrill. However, the three anesthetize him and then blackmail him by taking nude pictures of him in bed with one of the prostitutes.On their return from Japan, Hawkeye and Trapper immediately go into surgery for several hours. Done with the surgery and eager to get some sleep, they head back to their tent only to find that Duke has locked it up. They then observe him sneaking Hot Lips out, making it clear that Duke was not as averse to the chief nurse as he claimed.On a visit to the 4077th, General Hammond shares a drink with Hawkeye, Trapper and Duke and suggests that their two units play a "friendly" football game, with some money thrown into a pot to make bets ($5,000 or $6,000). Seeing an opportunity to make some money, Hawkeye comes up with a plan. First, they get Henry to apply for a specific neurosurgeon: Dr. Oliver Harmon "Spearchucker" Jones (Fred Williamson), a former professional football player for the San Francisco 49ers. Then, Hawkeye's plan calls for them to bet half their money up front and keep the ringer (Jones) out of the first half of the game. Once the other team has racked up some easy points and become confident enough to offer good odds to bet the rest of the money, the 4077th brings in Jones for the second half. The game goes down to the last play, described as "center-eligible", which calls for the ball to be returned from the quarterback (Trapper) to the center (Wade Douglas Vollmer), who then hides the ball under his jersey. While everyone chases the phantom ball, Vollmer runs unobserved to score a touchdown, winning the game and the bets for the 4077th.Not long after the football game, Hawkeye and Duke get their discharge orders and begin their journey home - in the same Jeep they arrived in, while the PA Announcer reads the credits.The screenplay, by Ring Lardner, Jr., is radically different from the original novel; in the DVD audio commentary, Altman describes the novel as "pretty terrible" and somewhat "racist" (the only major black character has the nickname "Spearchucker"). He claims that the screenplay was used only as a springboard. However, the screenplay itself reveals that, while there is some improvisation in the film, and although Altman moved major sequences around, most sequences are in the screenplay. The main deletion is a subplot of Ho-Jon's return to the 4077thas a casualty. When Radar steals blood from Henry, it is for Ho-Jon's operation under Trapper and Hawkeye's scalpels. When the surgeons are playing poker after the football game, they are resolutely ignoring a dead body being driven awayHo-Jon's. The main deviation from the script is the trimming of much of the dialogue.The filming process was difficult, because of tensions between the director and his cast. During principal photography, Sutherland and Gould spent a third of their time trying to get Altman fired;[5] Altman, relatively new to the filmmaking establishment, at that time lacked the credentials to justify his unorthodox filmmaking process and had a history of turning down work rather than creating a poor-quality product.[6] Altman: "I had practice working for people who don't care about quality, and I learned how to sneak it in."[7] Altman later commented that if he had known about Gould and Sutherland, he would have resigned.[8] Gould later sent a letter of apology, and Altman used him in some of his later works, but he never worked with Sutherland again.There were only a few uses of loudspeaker announcements in the original cut. When Altman realized he needed more structure to his largely episodic film, editor Danford Greene suggested using more loudspeaker announcements to frame different episodes of the story. Greene took a second-unit crew and filmed additional shots of the speakers. On the same night that these scenes were shot, American astronauts landed on the moon.[9]During production, a caption that mentions the Korean setting was added to the beginning of the film,[10] at the request of 20th Century Fox studios.[11] The Korean War is explicitly referenced in announcements on the camp public address system[12] and during a radio announcement that plays while Hawkeye and Trapper are putting in Col. Merrill's office which also cites the film as taking place in 1951.[citation needed]In his director's commentary on the DVD release, Altman says that MASH was the first major studio film to use the word "fuck" in its dialogue. The word is spoken during the football game near the end of the film by "The Painless Pole" when he says to an opposing football player, "All right, Bud, this time your fucking head is coming right off!" The actor, John Schuck, has said in several interviews that Altman encouraged ad-libbing, and that particular statement made it into the film without a second thought. Interestingly, the offending word was not censored during a late-night broadcast of the film on ABC in 1985; subsequent broadcasts of the film on network television have the word removed altogether. (MASH had its television premiere as a CBS Friday Night Movie on September 13, 1974 @ 9:00 (EDT), three days after the start of the third season of the M*A*S*H TV series; it was repeated on CBS March 5, 1976.)Johnny Mandel composed incidental music used throughout the film. Also heard on the soundtrack are Japanese vocal renditions of such songs as "Tokyo Shoe Shine Boy", "My Blue Heaven","Happy Days are Here Again", "Chattanooga Choo Choo", and "Hi-Lili, Hi-Lo"; impromptu performances of "Onward, Christian Soldiers" and "Hail to the Chief" by cast members; and the instrumental "Washington Post March" during the climactic football game. Columbia Records issued a soundtrack album for the film in 1970.MASH features the song "Suicide Is Painless", with music by Mandel and lyrics by Mike Altman, the director's then 14-year-old son. The version heard under the opening credits was sung by uncredited session vocalists John Bahler, Tom Bahler, Ron Hicklin, and Ian Freebairn-Smith (on the single release, the song is attributed to "The Mash"); the song is reprised later in the film by Pvt. Seidman (played by Ken Prymus). Altman has noted in interviews that his son made quite a bit more money off publishing royalties for the song than the $70,000 or so he was paid to direct the film.The film won the Palme d'Or at the 1970 Cannes Film Festival.[13] It was nominated for five Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Supporting Actress (Sally Kellerman), and Best Film Editing, and won an Oscar for its screenplay.The film won the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture (Musical or Comedy) in 1971.The movie was the 38th film to be released to the home video market when 20th Century Fox licensed fifty motion pictures from their library to Magnetic Video.In 1996, MASH was deemed "culturally significant" by the Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.This film is number 17 on Bravo's "100 Funniest Movies".This film is ranked #54 on "AFI" list of the top 100 movies of all time.January 25, 1970(1970-01-25)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Music5 Reception

5.1 Accolades

5.1 Accolades6 See also7 References8 External links5.1 AccoladesDonald Sutherland as Capt. Benjamin Franklin "Hawkeye" PierceElliott Gould as Capt. John Francis Xavier "Trapper John" McIntyreTom Skerritt as Capt. Augustus Bedford "Duke" ForrestSally Kellerman as Major Margaret "Hot Lips" HoulihanRobert Duvall as Major Frank BurnsRoger Bowen as Lt. Col. Henry Braymore BlakeRen Auberjonois as Father John Patrick "Dago Red" MulcahyJohn Schuck as Capt. Walter Koskiusko "The Painless Pole" Waldowski, DDSCarl Gottlieb as Capt. John "Ugly John" BlackDanny Goldman as Capt. MurrhardtCorey Fischer as Capt. Dennis Patrick BandiniJo Ann Pflug as Lt. Maria "Dish" SchneiderIndus Arthur as Lt. LeslieDawne Damon as Capt. ScorchTamara Wilcox-Smith as Capt. Bridget "Knocko" McCarthyDavid Arkin as SSgt. Wade Douglas Vollmer/PA Announcer. (Note: In the movie, Duke called him "Lee".)Gary Burghoff as Cpl. "Radar" O'ReillyKen Prymus as Pfc. SeidmanFred Williamson as Capt. Oliver Harmon "Spearchucker" JonesMichael Murphy as Capt. Ezekiel Bradbury "Me Lay" Marston IVTimothy Brown as Cpl. JudsonBud Cort as Pvt. Lorenzo BooneG. Wood as Brig. Gen. Charlie HammondKim Atwood as Ho-JonDale Ishimoto as Korean doctorBobby Troup as SSgt. GormanMarvin Miller as PA AnnouncerBattle CircusMASH at the Internet Movie DatabaseMASH at the TCM Movie DatabaseMASH at AllRoviMASH at Box Office MojoElliott Gould remembers M*A*S*H, from the BBC website; in RealMediaThe Third Man is a 1949 British film noir, directed by Carol Reed and starring Joseph Cotten, Alida Valli, Orson Welles and Trevor Howard. It is particularly remembered for its atmospheric cinematography, performances, and musical score.[2] The screenplay was written by novelist Graham Greene, who subsequently published the novella of the same name (which he had originally written as a preparation for the screenplay). Anton Karas wrote and performed the score, which used only the zither; its title music "The Third Man Theme" topped the international music charts in 1950.American pulp Western writer Holly Martins (Joseph Cotten) arrives in Post-World War II Vienna seeking his childhood friend, Harry Lime (Orson Welles), who has offered him a job. Martins discovers that Lime was killed by a car while crossing the street. At Lime's funeral, Martins meets two British Army Police: Sergeant Paine (Bernard Lee), a fan of Martins's books, and his superior, Major Calloway (Trevor Howard). Afterwards Martins is asked to give a lecture to a book club a few days later. He then meets a friend of Lime's, "Baron" Kurtz (Ernst Deutsch), who tells Martins that he and another friend, Popescu (Siegfried Breuer), carried Lime to the side of the street after the accident and, before he died, Lime asked them to take care of Martins and Lime's actress girlfriend, Anna Schmidt (Alida Valli).Martins goes to see Anna and becomes suspicious that Lime's death was not an accident. The porter at Lime's apartment building says that Lime was killed immediately and that three men carried the body, not two. Martins and Anna discover that the police are searching her flat, who confiscate a forged passport and detain her. The next evening Martins visits Lime's "medical advisor", Dr. Winkel (Erich Ponto), who says that he arrived at the accident after Lime was dead, and only two men were there.The porter offers to give Martins more information, but someone kills him before Martins can see him. When Martins arrives, the crowd believes that he is involved and becomes hostile. Escaping from them, Martins returns to the hotel, and a cab immediately takes him to the book club, where he makes a poor speech. When Popescu enters, he asks about Martins's next book. Martins says that it will be called The Third Man, "a murder story" inspired by facts. Popescu tells Martins that he should stick to fiction. Martins sees two thugs advancing towards him and flees.Calloway again advises Martins to leave Vienna, but Martins refuses and demands that Lime's death be investigated. Calloway reveals that Lime's racket was stealing penicillin from military hospitals, diluting it, and selling it on the black market, leading to many deaths. Martins, convinced, agrees to leave.Martins learns that Anna too has been told about Lime's crimes and is about to be sent to the Soviet sector. Leaving her apartment, Martins notices someone watching from a dark doorway. A shaft of light reveals the person to be Lime, who flees, ignoring Martins's calls, and vanishes. Martins summons Calloway, who deduces that Lime has escaped through the sewers. The British police exhume Lime's coffin and discover that the body is that of the orderly who stole the penicillin for Lime.The next day, Martins meets with Lime, and they ride Vienna's Ferris wheel, the Wiener Riesenrad. Lime obliquely threatens Martins, reveals the full extent of his ruthlessness, and then reiterates his job offer before leaving quickly. Calloway then asks Martins to help capture Lime, and Martins agrees, asking for Anna's safe conduct out of Vienna in exchange. However, when Anna learns this, she refuses to leave. Exasperated, Martins decides to leave, but on the way to the airport, Calloway stops at a hospital to show Martins children dying of meningitis that had been treated using Lime's diluted penicillin.Lime arrives to rendezvous with Martins, but Anna warns him. He tries once again to escape using the sewer tunnels, but the police are there in force. Lime shoots and kills Paine, but Calloway shoots and wounds Lime. Badly injured, Lime drags himself up a ladder to a street grating, but he cannot lift it. Martins then kills him using Paine's revolver. Later, Martins attends Lime's second funeral. At the risk of missing his flight out of Vienna, he waits to speak to Anna, but she ignores him and walks past.The atmospheric use of black-and-white expressionist cinematography by Robert Krasker, with harsh lighting and distorted camera angles, is a key feature of The Third Man. Combined with the unique theme music, seedy locations, and acclaimed performances from the cast, the style evokes the atmosphere of an exhausted, cynical post-war Vienna at the start of the Cold War. The film's unusual camera angles, however, were not appreciated by all critics at the time. C. A. Lejeune in The Observer described Reed's "habit of printing his scenes askew, with floors sloping at a diagonal and close-ups deliriously tilted" as "most distracting". American director William Wyler, a close friend of Reed's, sent him a spirit level, with a note saying, "Carol, next time you make a picture, just put it on top of the camera, will you?"[3]Before writing the screenplay, Graham Greene worked out the atmosphere, characterisation and mood of the story by writing a novella.[4] This was written purely to be used as a source text for the screenplay and was never intended to be read by the general public, although it was later published, together with The Fallen Idol.The narrator in the novella is Major Calloway, which gives the book a slightly different emphasis from that of the screenplay. A small portion of his narration is retained in a modified form at the very beginning of the film, the part in which (Reed's) voice-over declaims: "I never knew the old Vienna..."Other differences include the nationality of both Holly and Harry; they are English in the book. Martins' first name is Rollo rather than Holly. Popescu's character is an American called Cooler. Crabbin was a single character in the novella. In the original draft of the screenplay, he was to be replaced by two characters, played by Basil Radford and Naunton Wayne, but ultimately in the film, as in the novella, Crabbin is a single character.There is also a difference of ending. In the novella, it is implied that Anna and Rollo (Holly) are about to begin a new life together, in stark contrast to the unmistakable snub by Anna that marks the end of the film. Anna does walk away from Harry's grave in the book, but the text continues:"I watched him striding off on his overgrown legs after the girl. He caught her up and they walked side by side. I don't think he said a word to her: it was like the end of a story except that before they turned out of my sight her hand was through his arm which is how a story usually begins. He was a very bad shot and a very bad judge of character, but he had a way with Westerns (a trick of tension) and with girls (I wouldn't know what)."During the shooting of the film, the final scene was the subject of a dispute between Greene, who wanted the happy ending of the novella, and Selznick and Reed, who stubbornly refused to end the film on what they felt was an artificially happy note.Through the years there was occasional speculation that Welles, rather than Reed, was the de facto director of The Third Man. Film scholar Jonathan Rosenbaum, in his 2007 book, Discovering Orson Welles, calls it a "popular misconception",[5] although Rosenbaum did note that the film "began to echo the Wellesian theme of betrayed male friendship and certain related ideas from Citizen Kane."[6] In the final analysis, Rosenbaum writes, Welles "didn't direct anything in the picture; the basics of his shooting and editing style, its music and meaning, are plainly absent. Yet old myths die hard, and some viewers persist in believing otherwise."[6] Welles himself fuelled this theory with an interview he gave in 1958, in which he said that he had had an important role in making The Third Man, but that it was a "delicate matter, because [he] wasn't the producer".[7] However, he later admitted in a 1967 interview with Peter Bogdanovich that his involvement was minimal: "It was Carol's picture", he said.[8] However, Welles did contribute some of the films best-known dialogue. Bogdanovich also stated in the introduction to the DVD:However, I think it's important to note that the look of The Third Man and, in fact, the whole filmwould be unthinkable without Citizen Kane, The Stranger, and The Lady from Shanghai, all of which Orson made in the 40s, and all of which preceded The Third Man. Carol Reed, I think, was definitely influenced by Orson Welles, the director, from the films he had made.[9]Six weeks of principal photography was shot on location in Vienna,[10] ending on 11 December 1948. Production then moved to the Worton Hall Studios in Isleworth[11] and Shepperton studios near London, and was completed in March 1949.[12]The scenes of Harry Lime in the sewer were shot on location or on sets built at Shepperton, with most of the location shots using doubles for Welles.[13] Reed, however, claimed that despite initial reluctance, Welles quickly became enthusiastic, and stayed in Vienna to finish the film.[14] Water was sprayed on the cobbled streets to make them reflect the light at night.[13]In a famous scene, Lime meets with Martins on the Wiener Riesenrad, the large Ferris wheel in the Prater amusement park. Looking down on the people below from his vantage point, Lime compares them to dots. Back on the ground, he notes:"You know what the fellow said  in Italy, for thirty years under the Borgias, they had warfare, terror, murder and bloodshed, but they produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci and the Renaissance. In Switzerland, they had brotherly love, they had five hundred years of democracy and peace  and what did that produce? The cuckoo clock."This remark was added by Welles  in the published script, it is in a footnote. Greene wrote in a letter[15] "What happened was that during the shooting of The Third Man it was found necessary for the timing to insert another sentence." Welles apparently said the lines came from "an old Hungarian play"; the painter Whistler, in a lecture on art from 1885 (published in Mr Whistler's 'Ten O'Clock' [1888]), had said, "The Swiss in their mountains... What more worthy people!... yet, the perverse and scornful [goddess, Art] will have none of it, and the sons of patriots are left with the clock that turns the mill, and the sudden cuckoo, with difficulty restrained in its box! For this was Tell a hero! For this did Gessler die!" In This is Orson Welles (1993), Welles is quoted as saying "When the picture came out, the Swiss very nicely pointed out to me that they've never made any cuckoo clocks",[16] as the clocks are in fact German, native to the Black Forest. Writer John McPhee also points out that during the period of time the Borgia flourished in Italy, Switzerland was "the most powerful and feared military force in Europe", and not the peacefully neutral country it is currently.[17]As the original British release begins, the voice of director Carol Reed (uncredited) is heard describing post-war Vienna from the point of view of a racketeer. The version shown in American cinemas replaced this with narration by Joseph Cotten as Holly Martins. This change was instituted by David O. Selznick, who did not think American audiences would relate to the seedy tone of the original.[18] In addition, eleven minutes of footage were cut.[19] Today, Reed's original version appears on American DVDs, in showings on Turner Classic Movies, and in U.S. cinema releases, with the eleven minutes of footage restored. Both the Criterion Collection and Studio Canal DVD releases include a comparison of the two opening monologues.In the United Kingdom it was the most popular movie at the British box office for 1949.[20] In Austria, "local critics were underwhelmed"[21] and the film ran for only a few weeks. Still, the Viennese Arbeiter-Zeitung, although critical of a "not-too-logical plot", praised the film's "masterful" depiction of a "time out of joint" and the city's atmosphere of "insecurity, poverty and post-war immorality".[22] William Cook, after his 2006 visit to an eight-room museum in Vienna dedicated to the film, wrote "In Britain it's a thriller about friendship and betrayal. In Vienna it's a tragedy about Austria's troubled relationship with its past."[21]Upon its release in Britain and America, the film received overwhelmingly positive reviews.[23] Time magazine called the film "crammed with cinematic plums that would do the early Hitchcock proudingenious twists and turns of plot, subtle detail, full-bodied bit characters, atmospheric backgrounds that become an intrinsic part of the story, a deft commingling of the sinister with the ludicrous, the casual with the bizarre."[24] Bosley Crowther, after a prefatory qualification that the film was "designed [only] to excite and entertain", wrote that Reed "brilliantly packaged the whole bag of his cinematic tricks, his whole range of inventive genius for making the camera expound. His eminent gifts for compressing a wealth of suggestion in single shots, for building up agonized tension and popping surprises are fully exercised. His devilishly mischievous humor (sic) also runs lightly through the film, touching the darker depressions with little glints of the gay or macabre."[25] One of the very rare exceptions was the British communist paper The Daily Worker of 3 September 1949 which complained that "no effort is spared to make the Soviet authorities as sinister and unsympathetic as possible."[26]Critics today have hailed the film as a masterpiece. Roger Ebert added the film to his "Great Movies" list and wrote, "Of all the movies that I have seen, this one most completely embodies the romance of going to the movies."[27] Gene Siskel remarked it was an "exemplary piece of moviemaking, highlighting the ruins of WWII and juxtaposing it with the characters' own damaged histories".[citation needed] James Berardinelli has also praised the film, calling the film a "must-see" for lovers of film noir.What sort of music it is, whether jaunty or sad, fierce or provoking, it would be hard to reckon; but under its enthrallment, the camera comes into play... The unseen zither-player... is made to employ his instrument much as the Homeric bard did his lyre.The musical score was composed by Anton Karas and played by him on the zither. Before the production came to Vienna, Karas was an unknown wine bar performer. According to a November 1949 Time magazine article:[29]Reed later brought Karas to London, where the musician spent six weeks working with Reed on the score.[29] Decades later, film critic Roger Ebert wrote, "Has there ever been a film where the music more perfectly suited the action than in Carol Reed's The Third Man?"[30]"The Third Man Theme" was released as a single in 1949/50 (Decca in the UK, London Records in the US). It became a best-sellerby November 1949, 300,000 records had been sold in Britain, with the teen-aged Princess Margaret a reported fan.[29] Following its release in the U.S. in 1950 (see 1950 in music), "The Third Man Theme" spent eleven weeks at number one on Billboard's U.S. Best Sellers in Stores chart, from 29 April to 8 July.[31] The exposure made Karas an international star,[32] and the trailer for the film stated that "the famous musical score by Anton Karas" would have the audience "in a dither with his zither".[33]The comedian Victor Borge covered the theme on piano for his 1955 album Caught in the Act, and a version with a faster tempo and without the zither was featured on the 1965 album Going Places by Herb Alpert & the Tijuana Brass. The music is also used in a bar scene in the 2002 Vin Diesel action film xXx. Andy Samberg and Akiva Schaffer's comedy troupe The Lonely Island used a sample of the theme song on the song "Stork Patrol".[34] The theme also is used for the title sequence of "Ebert Presents At the Movies."The Third Man won the 1949 Grand Prix at the Cannes Film Festival,[35] the British Academy Award for Best Film, and an Academy Award for Best Black and White Cinematography in 1950.In 1999 the British Film Institute selected The Third Man as the best British film of the 20th century; five years later, the magazine Total Film ranked it fourth. The film also placed 57th on the American Film Institute's list of top American films in 1998, though the film's only American connections were its executive co-producer, David O. Selznick and actor Orson Welles. (The other two, Sir Alexander Korda and Carol Reed, were of Hungarian and British origin respectively.) In June 2008, the AFI revealed its "10 Top 10"the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genresafter polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. The Third Man was acknowledged as the fifth best film in the mystery genre.[36] In 2005, viewers of BBC Television's Newsnight Review voted the film their fourth favourite of all time; it was the only film in the top five made prior to 1970. The "American Film Institute" chose the film in the following categories:In Vienna there is a 'Third Man Museum' dedicated to the film.[37]This film lapsed into public domain in the United States when the copyright was not renewed after David Selznick's death. In 1996, the film's U.S. copyright protection was restored by the Uruguay Round Agreements Act[38] and credited to StudioCanal Image U.K. Ltd. The Criterion Collection released a digitally restored DVD of the original British print of the film. In 2008, Criterion released a Blu-ray edition,[39] now out of print, and in September 2010, Lions Gate reissued the film on Blu-ray.[33]Under current US copyright law, The Third Man remains under copyright until 1 January 2045.[40]The Third Man was adapted as a one-hour radio play on two broadcasts of Lux Radio Theater, first on 9 April 1951 with Joseph Cotten, then on 8 February 1954 with Ray Milland.A British radio drama series called The Adventures of Harry Lime, which was broadcast in the U.S. as The Lives of Harry Lime, centred on Lime's adventures, voiced by Welles, prior to his "death in Vienna". Fifty-two episodes were aired in 1951 and 1952, several of which Welles wrote, including "Ticket to Tangiers", which is included on the Criterion Collection and Studio Canal releases of the film. In addition, recordings of the 1952 episodes "Man of Mystery", "Murder on the Riviera" and "Blackmail is a Nasty Word" are included on the Criterion Collection DVD The Complete Mr. Arkadin.Streaming audio2 September 1949(1949-09-02)1 Plot2 Cast3 Style4 Production

4.1 Development
4.2 Principal photography
4.3 The "Swiss cuckoo clock" speech
4.4 Differences between releases

4.1 Development4.2 Principal photography4.3 The "Swiss cuckoo clock" speech4.4 Differences between releases5 Reception6 Score7 Awards and honours8 Copyright status9 Adaptations10 See also11 References

11.1 Notes
11.2 Bibliography

11.1 Notes11.2 Bibliography12 External links4.1 Development4.2 Principal photography4.3 The "Swiss cuckoo clock" speech4.4 Differences between releases11.1 Notes11.2 BibliographyJoseph Cotten as Holly MartinsAlida Valli as Anna SchmidtOrson Welles as Harry LimeTrevor Howard as Major CallowayBernard Lee as Sgt. PaineWilfrid Hyde-White as CrabbinErich Ponto as Dr. WinkelErnst Deutsch as 'Baron' KurtzSiegfried Breuer as PopescuPaul Hrbiger as Karl, Harry's PorterHedwig Bleibtreu as Anna's LandladyRobert Brown as British Military Policeman in Sewer ChaseAlexis Chesnakov as BrodskyHerbert Halbik as HanslPaul Hardtmuth as the Hall Porter at Sacher'sGeoffrey Keen as British Military PolicemanEric Pohlmann as Waiter at Smolka'sAnnie Rosar as the Porter's WifeJoseph Cotten as the Narrator (pre-1999 US version)Carol Reed as the Narrator (pre-1999 UK, and all post-'99 versions)AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - #57AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills - #75AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Harry Lime - #37 Villain

Harry Lime - #37 VillainAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"In Switzerland, they had brotherly love, and they had 500 years of democracy and peace. And what did that produce? The cuckoo clock." - Nominated

"In Switzerland, they had brotherly love, and they had 500 years of democracy and peace. And what did that produce? The cuckoo clock." - NominatedAFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - Nominated10 Top 10 #5 mystery filmHarry Lime - #37 Villain"In Switzerland, they had brotherly love, and they had 500 years of democracy and peace. And what did that produce? The cuckoo clock." - NominatedBFI Top 100 British filmsSchnlaterngasseThe Great British Films, pp 134136, Jerry Vermilye, 1978, Citadel Press, ISBN 0-8065-0661-XDrazin, Charles (2000). In Search of the Third Man. New York: Limelight Editions. ISBN978-0-87910-294-4.Moss, Robert (1987). The Films of Carol Reed. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN978-0-231-05984-8.Timmermann, Brigitte (2005). The Third Man's Vienna. Austria: Shippen Rock Publishing. ISBN3-9502050-1-2.The Third Man at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Third Man at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Third Man at AllRoviThe Third Man at Rotten TomatoesMaking The Third ManThird Man Private Collection (3mpc) Museum Dedicated to 'The Third Man'BibliographyThe Third Man tourThe Third Man locationsBFI feature on Graham Greene's true-life models for the characters of Harry Lime and Holly MartinsEssay comparing The Third Man to Steven Soderberghs The LimeyThe Third Man on Theater Guild on the Air: January 7, 1951The Third Man on Lux Radio Theater: April 9, 1951Fantasia is a 1940 American animated film produced by Walt Disney and released by Walt Disney Productions. With story direction by Joe Grant and Dick Huemer, and production supervision by Ben Sharpsteen, it is the third feature in the Disney animated features canon. The film consists of eight animated segments set to pieces of classical music conducted by Leopold Stokowski; seven of which are performed by the Philadelphia Orchestra. Music critic and composer Deems Taylor acts as the film's Master of Ceremonies, who introduces each segment in live action interstitial scenes.Disney settled on the film's concept as work neared completion on The Sorcerer's Apprentice, an elaborate Silly Symphonies short designed as a comeback role for Mickey Mouse who had declined in popularity. As production costs grew higher than what it could earn, he decided to include the short in a feature-length film with other segments set to classical pieces. The soundtrack was recorded using multiple audio channels and reproduced with Fantasound, a pioneering sound reproduction system that made Fantasia the first commercial film shown in stereophonic sound.Fantasia was first released in theatrical roadshow engagements held in thirteen U. S. cities from November 13, 1940. It received mixed critical reaction, and was unable to make a profit. In part this was due to World War II cutting off the profitable European market, but due as well to the film's high production costs and the expense of leasing theatres and installing the Fantasound equipment for the roadshow presentations. Also, audiences who felt that Disney had suddenly gone "highbrow" stayed away, preferring the standard Disney cartoons. The film was subsequently reissued multiple times with its original footage and audio being deleted, modified, or restored in each version. As of 2012, Fantasia has grossed $76.4 million in domestic revenue and is the 22nd highest-grossing film of all time in the U. S. when adjusted for inflation.[4] Walt's nephew Roy E. Disney co-produced a sequel released in 1999 titled Fantasia 2000.Fantasia opens with live action scenes of members of an orchestra gathering and tuning their instruments. Master of ceremonies Deems Taylor enters the stage and introduces the program.In 1936, Walt Disney felt that the Disney studio's star character Mickey Mouse needed a boost in popularity. He decided to feature the mouse in The Sorcerer's Apprentice, a deluxe cartoon short based on the poem written by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and set to the orchestral piece by Paul Dukas that was inspired by the original tale.[13] The concept of matching animation to classical music was used as early as 1928 in Disney's cartoon series, the Silly Symphonies, but he wanted to go beyond the usual slapstick, and produce shorts where "sheer fantasy unfolds...action controlled by a musical pattern has great charm in the realm of unreality. "[14][15] Upon receiving the rights to use the music by the end of July 1937,[16] Disney considered using a well-known conductor to record the music for added prestige. He happened to meet Leopold Stokowski, conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra since 1912, at Chasen's restaurant in Hollywood, and talked about his plans for the short. Stokowski recalled that he did "like the music"; was happy to collaborate on the project, and offered to conduct the piece at no cost.[17]Following their meeting, Disney's New York representative ran into Stokowski on a train headed for the East. In writing to Disney, he reported that Stokowski was "really serious in his offer to do the music for nothing. He had some very interesting ideas on instrumental coloring, which would be perfect for an animation medium".[17] In his excited response dated October 26, 1937, Disney wrote that he felt "all steamed up over the idea of Stokowski working with us...The union of Stokowski and his music, together with the best of our medium, would be the means of a success and should lead to a new style of motion picture presentation. "[18] He had already begun working on a story outline, and wished to use "the finest men...from color...down to animators"[19] on the short. The Sorcerer's Apprentice was to be promoted as a "special" and rented to theatres as a unique film, outside of the Mickey Mouse cartoon series.[17][20]An agreement signed by Disney and Stokowski on December 16, 1937 allowed the conductor to "select and employ a complete symphony orchestra" for the recording.[21] Disney hired a stage at the Culver Studios in California for the session. It began at midnight on January 9, 1938, and lasted for three hours using eighty-five Hollywood musicians.[22] As production costs of The Sorcerer's Apprentice climbed to $125,000, it became clearer to Disney and his brother Roy, who managed the studio's finances, that the short could never earn such a sum back on its own.[13] Roy wanted his brother to keep any additional costs on the film to a minimum. He said, "because of its very experimental and unprecedented nature...we have no idea what can be expected from such a production. "[17] Ben Sharpsteen, a production supervisor on Fantasia, noted that its budget was three to four times greater than the usual Silly Symphony, but Disney "saw this trouble in the form of an opportunity. This was the birth of a new concept, a group of separate numbersregardless of their running timeput together in a single presentation. It turned out to be a concertsomething novel and of high quality. "[23]Ideas to produce a complete feature film were pursued in February 1938, when enquiries were made to extend Stokowski's contract.[23] In August, Disney asked Stokowski's representative to have him return to the studios to select material for the new film, which was initially titled The Concert Feature.[17] The pair further thought of presenting the film with an on-screen host to introduce each number in the program. Both had heard composer and music critic Deems Taylor provide intermission commentary during radio broadcasts of the New York Philharmonic, and agreed he would be most suitable for the role.[18] Disney did contact Taylor about the project, but by then work on Pinocchio, Bambi, and development on his new Burbank studio kept him too busy to work on the new feature.[24] In a change of plans, Taylor was asked during a call on September 3, 1938 leave for the studios as soon as possible. He left New York City for Los Angeles by train two days later for a months visit.[18]Taylor arrived at the studio one day after a series of meetings began to select the musical pieces for The Concert Feature. Disney made story writers Joe Grant and Dick Huemer gather a preliminary selection of music and along with Stokowski, Taylor, and the heads of various departments, discussed their ideas.[23] Each meeting was recorded verbatim by stenographers with participants being given a copy of the entire conversation for review. As selections were considered, a recording of the piece was located and played back at the next gathering.[25] Disney did not contribute much to early discussions; he admitted that his knowledge of music was instinctive and untrained.[26] In one meeting, he inquired about a piece "on which we might build something of a prehistoric theme...with animals".[27] The group was considering to use The Firebird by Igor Stravinsky, but Taylor noted that his "Le Sacre du printemps would be something on that order", to which Disney replied upon hearing a recording, "This is marvelous! It would be perfect for prehistoric animals. There would be something terrific in dinosaurs, flying lizards, and prehistoric monsters. There could be beauty in the settings. "[28]Numerous choices were discarded as talks continued, including Moto Perpetuo by Niccol Paganini with "shots of dynamos, cogs, pistons" and "whirling wheels" to show the prduction of a collar button. Other deletions were Prelude in G minor and Troika by Sergei Rachmaninoff, and a rendition of "The Song of the Flea" by Mussorgsky which was to be sung by Lawrence Tibbett.[29] On September 29, 1938, around sixty of Disney's artists gathered for a two-and-a-half hour piano concert while he provided a running commentary about the new musical feature. A rough version of The Sorcerer's Apprentice was also shown that, according to one attendee, had the crowd applauding and cheering "until their hands were red. "[30] The final pieces were chosen the following morning, which included Toccata and Fugue in D minor, Cydalise et le Chvre-pied by Gabriel Piern, The Nutcracker Suite, Night on Bald Mountain, Ave Maria, Dance of the Hours, Clair de Lune by Claude Debussy, The Rite of Spring and The Sorcerer's Apprentice.[30] Disney had already begun working out the details for the segments, and showed greater enthusiasm and eagerness as opposed to his anxiety while starting on Pinocchio.[31]Clair de Lune was soon removed from the Fantasia program, but Disney and his writers encountered problems of setting a concrete story to Cydalise. Its opening march, "The Entry of the Little Fauns", first attracted Disney to the piece which at first provided suitable depictions of fauns he wanted. On January 5, 1939, following a search for a stronger piece to fit the mythological theme, the piece was replaced with sections of Beethoven's sixth symphony.[32] Stokowski disagreed with the switch, believing that Disney's "idea of mythology...is not quite what this symphony is about. " He was also concerned about the reception from classical music enthusiasts who would criticize Disney for venturing too far from the composer's intent.[33] Taylor on the other hand welcomed the change, describing it as "a stunning one", and saw "no possible objection to it. "[34]The new feature continued to be known as The Concert Feature or Musical Feature as late as November 1938. Hal Horne, a publicist for Disney's film distributor RKO Radio Pictures, wished for a different title, and gave the suggestion Filmharmonic Concert. Stuart Buchanan then held a contest at the studio for a title that produced almost 1,800 suggestions including Bach to Stravinsky and Bach and Highbrowski by Stokowski. Still, the favorite among the film's supervisors was Fantasia, an early working title that had even grown on Horne, "It isn't the word alone but the meaning we read into it. "[35] From the beginning of its development, Disney expressed the greater importance of music in Fantasia compared to his past work: "In our ordinary stuff, our music is always under action, but on this...we're supposed to be picturing this music - not the music fitting our story. "[36] Disney had hoped that the film would bring classical music to people that, including himself, had "walked out on this kind of stuff. "[37]Animation on The Sorcerer's Apprentice began on January 21, 1938 when James Algar, the director of the segment, assigned animator Preston Blair to work on the scene when Mickey Mouse wakes from his dream.[38] Each of the seven hundred members of staff at the time received a synopsis of the Goethe tale, and were encouraged to complete a twenty-question form that requested their ideas on what action might take place.[16][22] Layout artist Tom Codrick created what Dick Huemer described as "brilliantly colored thumbnails" from preliminary storyboard sketches using gouache paints, which featured bolder use of color and lighting than any previous Disney short.[39] Mickey was redesigned by animator Fred Moore who added pupils for the first time to achieve greater ranges of expression.[16][40] Most of the segment was shot in live action, including a scene where a UCLA athlete was asked to run and jump across one of the studio's sound stages with barrels in the way, which was used for reference when Mickey traverses through water.[41]Disney had been interested in producing abstract animation since he saw A Color Box by Len Lye from 1935. He explained the work done in the Toccata and Fugue was "no sudden idea...they were something we had nursed along several years but we never had a chance to try".[42] Preliminary designs included those from effects animator Cy Young, who produced drawings influenced by the patterns on the edge of a piece of sound film.[32] In late 1938 Disney hired Oskar Fischinger, a German artist who had produced numerous abstract animated films, including some with classical music, to work with Young. Upon review of three leica reels produced by the two, Disney rejected all three. According to Huemer all Fishinger "did was little triangles and designs...it didn't come off at all. Too dinky, Walt said. "[43] Fischinger, like Disney, was used to having full control over his work and was not used to working in a group. Feeling his designs were too abstract for a mass audience,[13] Fishinger left the studio in apparent despair, before the segment was completed, in October 1939.[44] Disney had plans to make the Toccata and Fugue an experimental three-dimensional film, with audiences being given cardboard stereoscopic frames with their souvenir programs, but this idea was abandoned.[42]In The Nutcracker Suite, animator Art Babbitt is said to have credited The Three Stooges as a guide for animating the dancing mushrooms in the Chinese Dance routine. He drew with a music score pinned to his desk to work out the choreography so he could relate the action to the melody and the counterpoint, "those nasty little notes underneath...so something has to be related to that".[45] The studio filmed professional dancers Joyce Coles and Marjorie Belcher wearing ballet skirts that resembled shapes of blossoms that were to sit above water for Dance of the Flutes. An Arabian dancer was also brought in to study the movements for the goldfish in Arab Dance.[46]An early concept for The Rite of Spring was to extend the story to the age of mammals and the first humans and the discovery of fire and man's triumph. John Hubley, the segment's art director, explained that it was later curtailed by Disney to avoid controversy from creationists, who promised to make trouble should he connect evolution with humans.[47] To gain a better understanding of the history of the planet the studio received guidance from Roy Chapman Andrews, the director of the American Museum of Natural History, English biologist Julian Huxley, paleontologist Barnum Brown, and astronomer Edwin Hubble.[48][19] Animators studied comets and nebulae at the Mount Wilson Observatory, and observed a herd of iguanas and a baby alligator that were brought into the studio.[49] The camera was kept at a low position throughout the segment to heighten the immensity of the dinosaurs.[48]For inspiration on the routines in Dance of the Hours, animators studied real life ballet performers including Marge Champion and Irina Baronova.[40] Animator John Hench was assigned to work on the segment, but resisted as he knew little about ballet. Disney then gave Hench season tickets to the Ballet Russe de Monte Carlo with backstage access so he could learn more about it.[50] Bla Lugosi, best known for his role in Dracula, was brought in to provide reference poses for Chernabog. As animator Bill Tytla disliked the results, he used colleague Wilfred Jackson to pose shirtless which gave him the images he needed.[13] There were ideas of releasing scents throughout the theater during Fantasia, including the smell of incense during Ave Maria.[51]Over one thousand artists and technicians were used in the making of Fantasia,[52] which features more than 500 characters.[53] Segments were color-keyed scene by scene so the colors in a single shot would harmonize between proceeding and following ones.[54] Before a segment's narrative pattern was complete, an overall color scheme was designed to the general mood of the music, and patterned to correspond with the development of the subject matter.[54] The studio's character model department would also sculpt three-dimensional clay models so the animators could view their subject from all angles.[38]Disney wanted to experiment in more sophisticated sound recording and reproduction techniques for Fantasia. "Music emerging from one speaker behind the screen sounds thin, tinkly and strainy. We wanted to reproduce such beautiful masterpieces...so that audiences would feel as though they were standing at the podium with Stokowski".[55] For the recording of The Sorcerer's Apprentice in January 1938,[22] engineers at Disney collaborated with RCA Corporation for using multiple audio channels which allowed any desired dynamic balance to be achieved upon playback. The stage was altered acoustically with double plywood semi-circular partitions that separated the orchestra into five sections to increase reverberation.[56] Though as the production of Fantasia developed, the setup used for The Sorcerer's Apprentice was abandoned for different multi-channel recording arrangements.On January 18, 1939, Stokowski signed an eighteen-month contract with Disney to conduct the remaining pieces with the Philadelphia Orchestra.[21] Recording began that April and lasted for seven weeks at the Academy of Music, the orchestra's home which was chosen for its excellent acoustics.[55][57] In the recording sessions, thirty-three microphones were placed around the orchestra that captured the music onto eight optical sound recording machines placed in the hall's basement. Each one represented an audio channel that focused on a different section of instruments: cellos and basses, violins, brass, violas, and woodwinds and tympani. The seventh channel was a combination of the first six while the eighth provided an overall sound of the orchestra at a distance.[55][58][59] A ninth was later added to provide a click track function for the animators to time their drawings to the music.[60][58] In the forty-two days of recording 483,000 feet of film was used.[55] Disney paid all the expenses which included the musician's wages, stage personnel, a music librarian, and the orchestra's manager that cost almost $18,000.[21] When the finished recordings arrived at the studio, a meeting was held on July 14, 1939 to allow the artists working on each segment to listen to Stokowski's arrangements, and suggest alterations in the sound to work more effectively with their designs.[61]The Disney brothers contacted David Sarnoff of RCA regarding the manufacture of a new system that would "create the illusion that the actual symphony orchestra is playing in the theater". Sarnoff backed out at first due to financial reasons, but agreed in July 1939 to make the equipment so long as the Disneys could hold down the estimated $200,000 in costs.[62] Though it was not exactly known how to achieve their goal, engineers at Disney and RCA investigated many ideas and tests made with various equipment setups.[56] The collaboration led to the development of Fantasound, a pioneering stereophonic surround sound system which innovated some processes widely used today, including simultaneous multi-track recording, overdubbing, and noise reduction.[58]Fantasound employed two projectors running at the same time. With one containing the picture film with a mono soundtrack for backup purposes, the other ran a sound film that was mixed from the eight tracks recorded at the Academy to four. Three of which contained the audio for the left, center, and right stage speakers respectively, while the fourth became a control track with amplitude and frequency tones that drove variable-gain amplifiers to control the volume of the three audio tracks.[56] In addition were three "house" speakers placed on the left, right, and center of the auditorium that derived from the left and right stage channels which acted as surround channels.[58] As the original recording was captured at almost peak modulation to increase signal-to-noise ratio, the control track was used to restore the dynamics to where Stokowski thought they should be. For this, a tone-operated gain-adjusting device was built to control the levels of each of the three audio tracks through the amplifiers.The illusion of sound traveling across the speakers was achieved with a device named the "pan pot", which directed the predetermined movement of each audio channel with the control track. Mixing of the soundtrack required six people to operate the various pan pots in real time, while Stokowski directed each level and pan change which was marked on his musical score. To monitor the recording levels at lower frequencies, Disney ordered eight three-color oscillators from the newly-established Hewlett-Packard company,[63] a predecessor from VU meters used today. Between the individual takes, prints, and remakes, approximately three million feet of sound film was used in the production of Fantasia.[55] Almost a fifth of the film's budget was spent on its recording techniques.[64]RKO balked at the idea of distributing Fantasia, which it described as a "longhair musical",[65] and believed its duration of two hours and five minutes plus intermission was too long for a general release.[66][67] It relaxed its exclusive distribution contract with Disney, who wanted a more prestigious exhibit in the form of a limited-run roadshow attraction. A total of thirteen roadshows were held across the United States; each involving two daily screenings with seat reservations booked in advance at higher prices and a fifteen-minute intermission. Disney hired film salesman Irving Ludwig to manage the first eleven engagements,[68] who was given specific instructions regarding each aspect of the film's presentation, including the setup of outside theater marquees and curtain and lighting cues. Patrons were taken to their seats by staff hired and trained by Disney,[69] and were given a program booklet illustrated by Gyo Fujikawa.[70]The first roadshow opened at the Broadway Theatre in New York City on November 13, 1940.[70] The Disneys had secured a year's lease with the venue that was fully equipped with Fantasound, which took personnel a week working around the clock to install.[71] Proceeds made on the night went to the British War Relief Society for the efforts in the Battle of Britain.[72] Ticket demand was so great that eight telephone operators were employed to handle the extra calls while the adjoining store was rented out to cater the box office bookings.[73] Fantasia ran at the Broadway for forty-nine consecutive weeks, the longest run achieved by a film at the time.[74] Its run continued for a total of fifty-seven weeks until February 28, 1942.[75]The remaining twelve roadshows were held throughout 1941, which included a thirty-nine week run[74] at the Carthay Circle Theatre in Los Angeles from January 29.[76][77] Fantasia broke the long-run record at the venue in its twenty-eighth week; a record previously held by Gone with the Wind.[78] Its eight-week run at the Fulton Theatre in Pittsburgh attracted over 50,000 people with reservations being made from cities located one hundred miles from the venue.[79] Engagements were also held at the Geary Theatre in San Francisco for eight months,[70] the Hanna Theatre in Cleveland for nine weeks,[80][81] the Majestic Theatre in Boston,[70] the Apollo Theater in Chicago,[82] and also in Philadelphia, Detroit, Buffalo, Minneapolis, Washington, D.C., and Baltimore.[83]Fantasia grossed over $300,000 in the first sixteen weeks in New York; over $20,000 in the opening five weeks in San Francisco; and almost the same amount in the first ten weeks both in Los Angeles and Boston.[73] The first eleven roadshows earned a total of $1.3 million by April 1941,[74] but the $85,000 in production and installation costs of a single Fantasound setup,[58][84] along with theatres having to be leased,[85] forced Disney to exceed their loan limits.[86] The onset of the Second World War prevented plans for a potential release in Europe, normally the source of as much as forty-five per cent of the studio's income.[72] Up to eighty-eight engagements were outlined across five years, but wartime demands for material limited the number of Fantasound prints to sixteen.[74] All but one of the Fantasound setups were dismantled and given to the war effort.[1] Upon acquiring the film's distribution rights April 1941, RKO initially continued the roadshow booking policy but presented the film in mono, which was easier to exhibit.[87][88] The combined average receipts from each roadshow was around $325,000, which placed Fantasia at an even greater loss than Pinocchio.[89]Disney allowed RKO to handle the general release of Fantasia, but fought their decision to have the film cut. He gave in as the studio needed as much income as possible to remedy its finances, but refused to cut it himself, "You can get anybody you want to edit it...I can't do it. "[90] With no input from Disney, musical director Ed Plumb and Ben Sharpsteen reduced Fantasia to one hour and forty minutes at first, then to one hour and twenty minutes by removing most of Taylor's commentary and the Toccata and Fugue.[86][91] Fantasia was re-released in January 1942 at more popular prices with a mono soundtrack, and was placed on the lower half of double bills with the Western film Valley of the Sun.[92]RKO reissued Fantasia once more in 1946 with the animated sequences complete and the scenes of Taylor, Stokowski, and the orchestra restored but shortened. Its running time was restored to one hour and fifty-five minutes. This edit would be the standard form for subsequent re-releases, and was the basis for the 1990 restoration.[67]"I wanted a special show just like Cinerama plays today...I had Fantasia set for a wide screen. I had dimensional sound...To get that wide screen I had the projector running sideways...I had the double frame. But I didn't get to building my cameras or my projectors because the money problem came in...The compromise was that it finally went out standard with dimensional sound. I think if I'd had the money and I could have gone ahead I'd have a really sensational show at that time. "By 1955 the original sound negatives began to deteriorate, though a four-track copy had survived in good condition. Using the remaining Fantasound system at the studio, a three-track stereo copy was transferred across telephone wires onto magnetic film at an RCA facility in Hollywood.[1] This copy was used when Fantasia was reissued in stereo by Buena Vista Distribution in SuperScope, a derivative of the anamorphic widescreen CinemaScope format, on February 7, 1956.[67] The projector featured an automatic control mechanism designed by Disney engineers that was coupled to a variable anamorphic lens, which allowed the picture to switch between its Academy standard aspect ratio of 1.33:1 to the wide ratio of 2.35:1 in twenty seconds without a break in the film. This was achieved by placing the cues that controlled the mechanism on a separate track in addition to the three audio channels. Only selected parts of the animation were stretched, while all live action scenes remained unchanged.[93] This reissue garnered some criticism from viewers, as the widescreen format led to the cropping and reframing of the images.[94]On February 20, 1963, Fantasia was re-released in both standard and SuperScope versions with stereo sound, though existing records are unclear. Its running time was fifty-six seconds longer than the previous issue which is unexplained.[67] This was the final release that occurred before Disney's death in 1966.Fantasia began to make a profit from its $2.28 million budget after its return to theaters on December 17, 1969.[1][67] The film was promoted with a psychedelic-styled advertising campaign, and it became popular among teenagers and college students who were reported to have taken drugs for a psychedelic experience.[95] Animator Ollie Johnston recalled that young people "thought we were on a trip when we made it...every time we'd go to talk to a school or something, they'd ask us what we were on. "[96] The release is also noted for the controversial removal of four scenes from The Pastoral Symphony over racial stereotyping. Fantasia was issued on a regular basis, typically for exhibition in art houses in college towns, until the mid-1970s.[67]The film was reissued nationwide once more on April 15, 1977, this time with simulated stereo sound.[1][72] This edit featured the RKO distribution logo being replaced with that of Buena Vista Distribution, since RKO had not been part of a release since 1946. It had not been removed earlier as the credit sequence would have required to be re-shot. A two-and-a-half-minute reduction in the film's running time in this version remains unclear in existing records.[67]For the 1982 and 1985 releases Disney presented Fantasia with a completely new soundtrack recorded in Dolby Stereo. First released on April 2, 1982[67] this version of the film marked the first time a film's soundtrack had been digitally re-recorded in its entirety. To replace Stokowski's recordings, the noted film conductor Irwin Kostal was engaged. He directed a 121-piece orchestra and 50-voice choir[97] for the recording that took place over eighteen sessions and cost $1 million.[98] To maintain continuity with the animation Kostal based his performance on the tempos and pacing of the Stokowski recordings, including the cuts and revisions to The Rite of Spring. However, for Night on Bald Mountain he used Mussorgsky's original orchestration instead of Leopold Stokowski's own edition that was part of the original soundtrack. The new recording also corrected a two-frame lag in projection caused by the old recording techniques used in the 1930s.[2] Deems Taylor's scenes were deleted and a much briefer voiceover narration was recorded by Hugh Douglas[67] as the studio felt the modern audience "is more sophisticated and knowledgeable about music. "[2] This version returned to around 400 theaters in 1985,[99] this time with actor Tim Matheson providing the narration.[100]For its fiftieth anniversary, Fantasia returned to 550 theaters nationwide on October 5, 1990 in its traditional 1946 version including the live action scenes with Taylor and the original Stokowski score. The film underwent a two-year restoration process which began after a six-month search to piece together the original negatives that had been in storage since 1946. This marked the first time since then that a release of the film had been processed from the original and not from a copy.[101] Each of its 535,680 frames were restored at YCM Laboratories,[102] and an untouched print from 1951 was used for guidance on color and tone.[101] Theaters were required to have specific stereo equipment installed, and to present the film in its original 1.33:1 aspect ratio with black borders on the side of their screens.[96][103] The Stokowski soundtrack was digitally remastered using the 1955 magnetic soundtrack, with an estimated three thousand pops and hisses being removed in the process.[57][58][103] The 1990 reissue of Fantasia went on to gross $25 million domestically.[104]Disney considered releasing a multi-disc 78-rpm record album of Fantasia's soundtrack in conjunction with the film's 1940 roadshow release, but this idea was not realized.[21] The soundtrack was ultimately released as a three record LP set in sixteen countries[105] by Disneyland Records in 1957[70] under the catalog number WDX-101. Disney was required to obtain permission from Stokowski, who initially rejected the deal unless the Philadelphia Orchestra Association received a share of the royalties.[105] With nearly two hours of music, the Fantasia soundtrack album is the longest soundtrack album ever released of a Disney film.The Fantasia soundtrack album contains all of the musical selections but none of the commentary from the film. After stereo LP's became possible, Buena Vista Records released a stereo version of the soundtrack album.The original soundtrack was remastered and issued as a two-disc CD set by Walt Disney Records in 1991. It eventually sold 100,000 copies.[70][106] This was re-released in 2006. In 1982, Buena Vista Records also released a two-disc edition of the re-recorded soundtrack conducted by Irwin Kostal.[97] This was also issued on CD by Walt Disney Records.Fantasia has received three home video releases. The first, featuring the 1990 restored theatrical version, was released on VHS and laser disc on November 1, 1991 as part of the "Walt Disney Classics" line. The 50-day release prompted 9.25 million advance orders for cassettes and a record 200,000 for discs, doubling the figure of the previous record. The "Deluxe Edition" package included the film, a "making of" feature, a commemorative lithograph, a 16-page booklet, a two-disc soundtrack of the Stokowski score and a certificate of authenticity signed by Roy E. Disney, the nephew of Walt.[104] Fantasia became the biggest-selling sell-through cassette of all time with 14.2 million copies being purchased.[107] The record was surpassed by Beauty and the Beast in December 1992.[108] This version was also released as a DVD in 2000, outside of the U. S. in the United Kingdom and other countries, again under the "Walt Disney Classics" banner.[109]In November 2000, Fantasia was released on video for the second time, this time along with Fantasia 2000, on DVD with 5.1 surround sound. The films were issued both separately and in a three-disc set called The Fantasia Anthology. A variety of bonus features were included in the bonus disc, The Fantasia Legacy. This edition attempted to follow as closely as possible the runtime and format of the original roadshow version, and included additional restored live-action footage of Taylor and the orchestra, including the bookends to the film's intermission.[110] In the 2000 and 2010 releases, Deems Taylor's voice has been overdubbed throughout by Corey Burton because most of the audio tracks to Taylor's restored scenes have been lost.[111] The 2000 UK release, however, was in the 1991 video version.[109][clarification needed]Both films were reissued again by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment in November 2010 separately, as a two-disc DVD/Blu-ray set and a combined DVD and Blu-ray four-disc (named the "Fantasia 2 Movie Collection") set that featured 1080p high-definition video and 7.1 surround sound.[112] The 2010 version of Fantasia featured a new restoration by Reliance MediaWorks and a new sound restoration,[113] but was editorially identical to the 2000 version.[114] This marked the first time the roadshow version was released in Europe. Fantasia was withdrawn from release and returned to the "Disney Vault" moratorium on April 30, 2011 (although it remains on sale until existing stocks are depleted).[115][116]Among those at the film's premiere was film critic Bosley Crowther of The New York Times, who noted that "motion history was made last night...Fantasia dumps conventional formulas overboard and reveals the scope of films for imaginative excursion...Fantasia...is simply terrific. "[72] Peyton Boswell, an editor at Art Digest, called it "an aesthetic experience never to be forgotten. "[84] Time magazine described the premiere as "stranger and more wonderful than any of Hollywood's" and the experience of Fantasound "as if the hearer were in the midst of the music. As the music sweeps to a climax, it froths over the proscenium arch, boils into the rear of the theatre, all but prances up and down the aisles. "[49] Dance Magazine devoted its lead story to the film, saying that "the most extraordinary thing about Fantasia is, to a dancer or balletomane, not the miraculous musical recording, the range of color, or the fountainous integrity of the Disney collaborators, but quite simply the perfection of its dancing. "[72] Variety also hailed Fantasia, calling it "a successful experiment to lift the relationship from the plane of popular, mass entertainment to the higher strata of appeal to lovers of classical music. "[117] The Chicago Tribune assigned three writers to cover the film's Chicago premiere: society columnist Harriet Pribble; film critic Mae Tinee; and music critic Edward Barry. Pribble left amazed at the "brilliantly-attired audience", while Tinee felt the film was "beautiful...but it is also bewildering. It is stupendous. It is colossal. It is an overwhelmingly ambitious orgy of color, sound, and imagination. " Barry was pleased with the "program of good music well performed...and beautifully recorded" and felt "pleasantly distracted" from the music to what was shown on the screen.[82] In a breakdown of reviews from both film and music critics, Disney author Paul Anderson found 33% to be "very positive", 22% both "positive" and "positive and negative", and 11% negative.[118]Those who adopted a more negative view at the time of the film's release were mostly music critics who resisted the idea of presenting classical music with visual images, arguing that doing so would rob the musical pieces of their integrity. Composer and music critic Virgil Thomson praised Fantasound which he thought offered "good transmission of music", but disliked the "musical taste" of Stokowski, with exception to The Sorcerer's Apprentice and The Rite of Spring.[72] Olin Downes of The New York Times too hailed the quality of sound that Fantasound presented, but felt that "much of Fantasia distracted from or directly injured the scores. "[72] Film critic Pauline Kael dismissed parts of Fantasia as "grotesquely kitschy".[119] Some parents resisted paying the higher roadshow prices for their children, and several complained that the Night on Bald Mountain segment had frightened them.[90]There were also a few negative reactions that were more political in nature, especially since the film's release happened at a time when Nazi Germany reigned supreme in Europe. One review of the film in this manner, written by Dorothy Thompson for The New York Herald Tribune on November 25, 1940, was especially harsh. Thompson claimed that she "left the theater in a condition bordering on nervous breakdown, " because the film was a "remarkable nightmare. " Thompson went on to compare the film to rampant Nazism, which was "the abuse of power" and "the perverted betrayal of the best instincts. " Above all, Thompson claimed, the film depicted nature as being "titanic" while man was only "a moving lichen on the stone of time" and was a negative "caricature of the Decline of the West, " because the film was "cruel" and "brutal and brutalizing. " In fact, she was so distraught by the film, Thompson claimed, that she even walked out of it before she saw the two last segments, Night on Bald Mountain and Ave Maria, because she did not want to be subject to any more of the film's "brutalization. "[120]Fantasia holds a "fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes, a website which aggregates film reviews. Its consensus"A landmark in animation and a huge influence on the medium of music video, Disney's Fantasia is a relentlessly inventive blend of the classics with phantasmagorical images". 98% of critics gave the film a positive review based on a sample of 48 reviews, with an average score of 8.6 out of 10. Among the website's "top critics" it holds a positive rating of 86% from seven reviews.[121] Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times rated the film four stars out of four, and noted that throughout Fantasia, "Disney pushes the edges of the envelope".[122]Remarks have also been made about Fantasia not being a children's film. Reporting on the popular culture site Inside Pulse and in The Eagle newspaper, Robert Saucedo remembered to be "not the only one...having to sit through the movie as a kid fidgeting in your seat as the film delivers abstract image after abstract image", concluding that Fantasia is "for adults and very nerdy kids, "[123][124] while news and gossip website PopSugar included Fantasia in its "10 Movies That Scared Buzz Readers as Kids" list.[125]Fantasia ranked fifth at the 1940 National Board of Review Awards in the Top Ten Films category.[126] Disney and Stokowski won a Special Award for the film at the 1940 New York Film Critics Circle Awards.[127] Fantasia was the subject of two Academy Honorary Awards on February 26, 1942  one for Disney, William Garity, John N. A. Hawkins, and the RCA Manufacturing Company for their "outstanding contribution to the advancement of the use of sound in motion pictures through the production of Fantasia", and the other to Stokowski "and his associates for their unique achievement in the creation of a new form of visualized music in Walt Disney's production Fantasia, thereby widening the scope of the motion picture as entertainment and as an art form".[128]In 1990, Fantasia was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".[129] On the 100th anniversary of cinema in 1995, the Vatican included Fantasia in its list of 45 "great films" made under the Art category; the others being Religion and Values.[130]Fantasia is featured in three lists that rank the greatest American films as determined by the American Film Institute. The film ranked number 58 in 100 Years... 100 Movies in 1998[131] before it was dropped from its 10th Anniversary revision in 2007,[132] though it was nominated for inclusion.[133] The 10 Top 10 list formed in 2008 placed Fantasia fifth under Animation.[131]In the late 1960s, four short scenes from The Pastoral Symphony were removed that depicted two characters in a racially-stereotyped manner[clarification needed]. A black centaurette called Sunflower was depicted polishing the hooves of a white centaurette, and a second named Otika appeared briefly during the procession scenes with Bacchus and his followers.[134] According to Disney archivist David Smith, the sequence was aired uncut on television in 1966 before the edits were made for the film's 1969 theatrical reissue.[135] John Carnochan, the editor responsible for the change in the 1991 video release, said "It's sort of appalling to me that these stereotypes were ever put in".[136] Film critic Roger Ebert commented on the edit  "While the original film should, of course, be preserved for historical purposes, there is no need for the general release version to perpetrate racist stereotypes in a film designed primarily for children. "[137] The edits have been in place in all subsequent theatrical and home video reissues.In May 1992, the Philadelphia Orchestra Association filed a lawsuit against The Walt Disney Company and Buena Vista Home Video. The orchestra maintained that as a co-creator of Fantasia, the group was entitled to half of the estimated $120 million in profits from video and laser disc sales.[106] The orchestra dropped its case in 1994 when the two parties reached an undisclosed settlement out of court.[138] British music publisher Boosey & Hawkes filed a further lawsuit in 1993, contending that Disney did not have the rights to distribute The Rite of Spring in the 1991 video releases because the permission granted to Disney by Stravinsky in 1940 was only in the context of a film to be shown in theaters.[139] The United States district court backed Boosey & Hawkes's case in 1996,[140] but the Second Circuit Court of Appeals reversed the ruling in 1998, stating that Disney's original "license for motion picture rights extends to video format distribution. "[141]Disney had wanted Fantasia to be an ongoing project, with a new edition being released every few years.[142] His plan was to substitute one of the original segments with a new one as it was complete, so the viewer would always see a new version of the film.[70] From January to August 1941, story material was developed based on additional pieces, including Ride of the Valkyries by Richard Wagner, The Swan of Tuonela by Jean Sibelius, Invitation to the Dance by Carl Maria von Weber, Flight of the Bumblebee by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov,[13][70] which was later adapted into the Bumble Boogie segment in Melody Time (1948), and there was even consideration for a segment inspired by the Polka and Fugue from Schwanda the Bagpiper by Jaromr Weinberger. The film's disappointing initial box office performance and the advent of World War II brought an end to these plans.[143] Taylor had prepared introductions for The Firebird by Stravinsky, La Mer by Claude Debussy, Adventures in a Perambulator by John Alden Carpenter, Don Quixote by Richard Strauss, and Pictures at an Exhibition by Mussorgsky "to have them for the future in case we decided to make any one of them".[142][144]Clair de Lune was another segment that was part of the film's original program. After being completely animated, it was cut out of the final film to shorten its already long running time. The segment featured two egrets flying through the Everglades on a moonlit night. The sequence was later edited and re-scored for the Blue Bayou segment in Make Mine Music (1946). A workprint of the original was discovered and Clair de Lune was restored in 1992, complete with the original soundtrack of Stokowski with the Philadelphia Orchestra. It was included as a bonus feature in The Fantasia Anthology DVD in 2000.[111]"Fantasia is timeless. It may run 10, 20 or 30 years. It may run after I'm gone. Fantasia is an idea in itself. I can never build another Fantasia. I can improve. I can elaborate. That's all. "In 1980, the Los Angeles Times reported that animators Wolfgang Reitherman and Mel Shaw had begun work on Musicana, "an ambitious concept mixing jazz, classical music, myths, modern art and more, following the old Fantasia format. "[145] Animation historian Charles Solomon wrote that development took place between 1982 and 1983, which combined "ethnic tales from around the world with the music of the various countries". Proposed segments for the film included a battle between an ice god and a sun goddess set to Finlandia by Sibelius, one set in the Andes to the songs of Yma Sumac, and another featuring caricatures of Louis Armstrong and Ella Fitzgerald. The project was shelved in favor of Mickey's Christmas Carol.[146]Roy E. Disney, the nephew of Walt, co-produced Fantasia 2000 which entered production in 1990 and features seven new segments performed by the Chicago Symphony Orchestra with conductor James Levine.[147] The Sorcerer's Apprentice is the only segment retained from the original film. Fantasia 2000 premiered at Carnegie Hall on December 17, 1999 as part of a five-city live concert tour, followed by a four-month engagement in IMAX cinemas[148] and a wide release in regular theatres, in 2000.[149]Fantasia is parodied in A Corny Concerto, a Warner Bros. cartoon from 1943 of the Merrie Melodies series. The short features Elmer Fudd[150] in the role of Taylor, wearing his styled eyeglasses, who introduces two segments set to pieces by Johann Strauss (Tales from the Vienna Wood and the Blue Danube, both featuring Porky and Bugs and Daffy respectively). In 1976, Italian animator Bruno Bozzetto produced Allegro Non Troppo, a feature-length parody of Fantasia.[151] Walt Disney Pictures used the story of The Sorcerer's Apprentice as a basis for its eponymous fantasy-adventure film in 2010.[152]The animated television series The Simpsons references Fantasia in a few episodes. Matt Groening, the creator of the franchise, expressed a wish to make a parody film named Simpstasia; it was never produced, partly because it would have been too difficult to write a feature-length script.[153] In "Treehouse of Horror IV", director David Silverman had admired the animation in Night on Bald Mountain, and made the first appearance of Devil Flanders resemble Chernabog.[154] The episode "Itchy & Scratchy Land" references The Sorcerer's Apprentice in a snippet titled "Scratchtasia" that features the music and several shots parodying it exactly.[155]Fantasia is also referenced in the animated series South Park in the episode "Chef's Chocolate Salty Balls", where Mr. Hankey dons a wizard outfit and drives out an independent film festival by summoning a wave of sewage, similar to Mickey's dream of summoning a storm in The Sorcerer's Apprentice.The Sorcerer's Hat is the icon of Disney's Hollywood Studios, one of the four theme parks located at Walt Disney World Resort. The structure is of the magic hat from The Sorcerer's Apprentice.[156] Also located at the resort is Fantasia Gardens, a miniature golf course that integrates characters and objects from the film in each hole.[157] The fireworks and water show Fantasmic! features scenes from The Sorcerer's Apprentice and other Fantasia segments on water projection screens, and involves the plot of Mickey as the apprentice doing battle with the Disney Villains.[158]For the 20th anniversary of Disneyland Paris, Mickey will be depicted in a special version of his Sorcerer's Apprentice outfit. His friends will also wear similar outfits as well.In 1991, a side-scrolling eponymous video game developed by Infogrames was released for the Sega Mega Drive/Genesis system.[159] The player controls Mickey Mouse, who must find missing musical notes scattered across four elemental worlds based upon the film's segments.There are several film reel levels based on the Sorcerer's Apprentice that appear on Epic Mickey, a game released in 2010 for the Wii console. Yen Sid and Chernabog also make cameo appearances in the game (with the former narrating the opening and ending of the game and the latter as a painting).[160]The Disney/Square Enix crossover game series Kingdom Hearts features Chernabog as a boss in the first installment.[161] The Night on Bald Mountain piece is played during the fight. In Kingdom Hearts II, Yen Sid is given a speaking role and is voiced in English by Corey Burton. Symphony of Sorcery, a world based on the movie, appears in Kingdom Hearts 3D: Dream Drop Distance. Like the Timeless River world in Kingdom Hearts II, it is featured as a period of Mickey Mouse's past. [162]Musical score conducted by Leopold Stokowski. Performed by the Philadelphia Orchestra, except as noted.November 13, 1940(1940-11-13)1 Program2 Production

2.1 Origins
2.2 Development
2.3 Design and animation
2.4 Soundtrack

2.4.1 Recording
2.4.2 Fantasound



2.1 Origins2.2 Development2.3 Design and animation2.4 Soundtrack

2.4.1 Recording
2.4.2 Fantasound

2.4.1 Recording2.4.2 Fantasound3 Release history

3.1 Theatrical runs

3.1.1 19401941 roadshows with Fantasound
3.1.2 1942, 1946, 1956 and 1963 runs
3.1.3 1969, 1977, 1982, 1985 and 1990 runs


3.2 Home media

3.2.1 Audio
3.2.2 Video



3.1 Theatrical runs

3.1.1 19401941 roadshows with Fantasound
3.1.2 1942, 1946, 1956 and 1963 runs
3.1.3 1969, 1977, 1982, 1985 and 1990 runs

3.1.1 19401941 roadshows with Fantasound3.1.2 1942, 1946, 1956 and 1963 runs3.1.3 1969, 1977, 1982, 1985 and 1990 runs3.2 Home media

3.2.1 Audio
3.2.2 Video

3.2.1 Audio3.2.2 Video4 Reception

4.1 Critical response
4.2 Awards and honors
4.3 Controversies

4.1 Critical response4.2 Awards and honors4.3 Controversies5 Additional material6 Legacy

6.1 Sequel
6.2 Parodies and spin-offs
6.3 Theme parks
6.4 Video games

6.1 Sequel6.2 Parodies and spin-offs6.3 Theme parks6.4 Video games7 Credits8 References9 Sources10 External links2.1 Origins2.2 Development2.3 Design and animation2.4 Soundtrack

2.4.1 Recording
2.4.2 Fantasound

2.4.1 Recording2.4.2 Fantasound2.4.1 Recording2.4.2 Fantasound3.1 Theatrical runs

3.1.1 19401941 roadshows with Fantasound
3.1.2 1942, 1946, 1956 and 1963 runs
3.1.3 1969, 1977, 1982, 1985 and 1990 runs

3.1.1 19401941 roadshows with Fantasound3.1.2 1942, 1946, 1956 and 1963 runs3.1.3 1969, 1977, 1982, 1985 and 1990 runs3.2 Home media

3.2.1 Audio
3.2.2 Video

3.2.1 Audio3.2.2 Video3.1.1 19401941 roadshows with Fantasound3.1.2 1942, 1946, 1956 and 1963 runs3.1.3 1969, 1977, 1982, 1985 and 1990 runs3.2.1 Audio3.2.2 Video4.1 Critical response4.2 Awards and honors4.3 Controversies6.1 Sequel6.2 Parodies and spin-offs6.3 Theme parks6.4 Video gamesToccata and Fugue in D Minor by Johann Sebastian Bach. Live-action shots of the orchestra illuminated in blue and gold, backed by superimposed shadows, fade into abstract patterns. Animated lines, shapes and cloud formations reflect the sound and rhythms of the music.[5]Nutcracker Suite by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky. Selections from Tchaikovsky's ballet suite underscore scenes depicting the changing of the seasons from summer to autumn to winter. A variety of dances are presented with fairies, fish, flowers, mushrooms, and leaves, including "Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy", "Chinese Dance", "Dance of the Flutes", "Arabian Dance", "Russian Dance" and "Waltz of the Flowers".[6]The Sorcerer's Apprentice by Paul Dukas. Based on Goethe's 1797 poem Der Zauberlehrling. Mickey Mouse, the young apprentice of the sorcerer Yen Sid, attempts some of his master's magic tricks but doesn't know how to control them.[7]Rite of Spring by Igor Stravinsky. A visual history of the Earth's beginnings is depicted to selected sections of the ballet score. The sequence progresses from the planet's formation to the first living creatures, followed by the reign and extinction of the dinosaurs.[8]Intermission/Meet the Soundtrack: The orchestra musicians depart and the Fantasia title card is revealed. After the intermission there is a brief jam session of jazz music led by a clarinettist as the orchestra members return. Then a humorously stylized demonstration of how sound is rendered on film is shown. An animated sound track "character", initially a straight white line, changes into different shapes and colors based on the sounds played.[9]The Pastoral Symphony by Ludwig van Beethoven. A mythical ancient Greek world of centaurs, cupids, fauns and other figures from classical mythology is portrayed to Beethoven's music. A gathering for a festival to honor Bacchus, the god of wine, is interrupted by Zeus who creates a storm and throws lightning bolts at the attendees.[10]Dance of the Hours by Amilcare Ponchielli. A comic ballet in four sections: Madame Upanova and her ostriches (Morning); Hyacinth Hippo and her servants (Afternoon); Elephanchine and her bubble-blowing elephant troupe (Evening); and Ben Ali Gator and his troop of alligators (Night). The finale finds all of the characters dancing together until their palace collapses.[11]Night on Bald Mountain by Modest Mussorgsky and Ave Maria by Franz Schubert. At midnight the devil Chernabog summons evil spirits and restless souls from their graves. The spirits dance and fly through the air until driven back by the sound of an Angelus bell as night fades into dawn. A chorus is heard singing Ave Maria as a line of robed monks is depicted walking with lighted torches through a forest and into the ruins of a cathedral.[12]Master of Ceremonies and narrator: Deems TaylorCinematography: James Wong HoweMusical score: Toccata and Fugue in D minor, BWV 565 by Johann Sebastian BachDirector: Samuel ArmstrongStory development: Lee Blair, Elmer Plummer, and Phil DikeArt director: Robert CormackBackground painting: Joe Stahley, John Hench, and Nino CarbeVisual development: Oskar FischingerAnimation: Cy Young, Art Palmer, Daniel MacManus, George Rowley, Edwin Aardal, Joshua Meador, and Cornett WoodMusical score: The Nutcracker Op. 71a by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky (excerpts)Director: Samuel ArmstrongStory development: Sylvia Moberly-Holland, Norman Wright, Albert Heath, Bianca Majolie and Graham HeidCharacter designs: John Walbridge, Elmer Plummer and Ethel KulsarArt direction: Robert Cormack, Al Zinnen, Curtiss D. Perkins, Arthur Byram and Bruce BushmanBackground painting: John Hench, Ethel Kulsar and Nino CarbeAnimation: Art Babbitt, Les Clark, Don Lusk, Cy Young and Robert StokesChoreography: Jules EngelMusical score: The Sorcerer's Apprentice by Paul Dukas

Performed by an orchestra of Los Angeles musicians, conducted by Stokowski.

Performed by an orchestra of Los Angeles musicians, conducted by Stokowski.Director: James AlgarStory development: Perce Pearce and Carl FallbergArt direction: Tom Codrick, Charles Phillipi and Zack SchwartzBackground painting: Claude Coats, Stan Spohn, Albert Dempster and Eric HansenAnimation supervisors: Fred Moore and Vladimir TytlaAnimation: Les Clark, Riley Thompson, Marvin Woodward, Preston Blair
Edward Love, Ugo D'Orsi, George Rowley and Cornett WoodPerformed by an orchestra of Los Angeles musicians, conducted by Stokowski.Musical score: The Rite of Spring by Igor Stravinsky (abridged)Directors: Bill Roberts and Paul SatterfieldStory development and research: William Martin, Leo Thiele, Robert Sterner and John Fraser McLeishArt direction: McLaren Stewart, Dick Kelsey and John HubleyBackground painting: Ed Starr, Brice Mack and Edward LevittAnimation supervision: Wolfgang Reitherman and Joshua MeadorAnimation: Philip Duncan, John McManus, Paul Busch, Art Palmer, Don Tobin, Edwin Aardal and Paul B. KossoffSpecial camera effects: Gail Papineau and Leonard PickleyNarrator: Deems TaylorDirectors: Ben Sharpsteen and David D. HandAnimation: Joshua Meador, Art Palmer, Harry Hamsell and George RowleyMusical score: Symphony No. 6 in F major, Op. 68 "Pastorale" by Ludwig van Beethoven (abridged)Directors: Hamilton Luske, Jim Handley and Ford BeebeStory development: Otto Englander, Webb Smith, Erdman Penner, Joseph Sabo, Bill Peet and George StallingsCharacter designs: James Bodrero, John P. Miller Lorna S. SoderstromArt direction: Hugh Hennesy, Kenneth Anderson, J. Gordon Legg, Herbert Ryman, Yale Gracey, and Lance NolleyBackground painting: Claude Coats, Ray Huffine, W. Richard Anthony, Arthur Riley, Gerald Nevius and Roy ForkumAnimation supervision: Fred Moore, Ward Kimball, Eric Larson, Art Babbitt, Oliver M. Johnston, Jr. and Don TowsleyAnimation: Berny Wolf, Jack Campbell, Jack Bradbury, James Moore, Milt Neil, Bill Justice, John Elliotte
Walt Kelly, Don Lusk, Lynn Karp, Murray McClellan, Robert W. Youngquist and Harry HamselMusical score: Dance of the Hours from the opera La Gioconda by Amilcare PonchielliDirectors: T. Hee and Norm FergusonCharacter designs: Martin Provensen, James Bodrero, Duke Russell and Earl HurdArt direction: Kendall O'Connor, Harold Doughty and Ernest NordliBackground painting: Albert Dempster and Charles ConnerAnimation supervision: Norm FergusonAnimation: John Lounsbery, Howard Swift, Preston Blair, Hugh Fraser, Harvey Toombs, Norman Tate
Hicks Lokey, Art Elliott, Grant Simmons, Ray Patterson and Franklin GrundeenMusical scores: Night on Bald Mountain by Modest Mussorgsky and Ave Maria, Op. 52 No. 6 by Franz SchubertDirector: Wilfred JacksonStory development: Campbell Grant, Arthur Heinemann, and Phil DikeArt direction: Kay Nielsen, Terrell Stapp, Charles Payzant and Thor PutnamBackground painting: Merle Cox, Ray Lockrem, Robert Storms, and W. Richard AnthonySpecial English lyrics for Ave Maria: Rachel FieldChoral director: Charles HendersonSoprano solo: Julietta NovisAnimation supervision: Vladimir TytlaAnimation: John McManus, William N. Shull, Robert W. Carlson, Jr., Lester Novros, and Don PattersonSpecial animation effects: Joshua Meador, Miles E. Pike, John F. Reed, and Daniel MacManusSpecial camera effects: Gail Papineau and Leonard PickleyAllan, Robin (2000). Walt Disney and Europe: European Influences on the Animated Feature Films of Walt Disne. Indiana University Press. ISBN978-0-253-21353-2.Amernic, Joel Henry; Craig, Russell (2006). CEO-Speak: The Language of Corporate Leadership. McGill-Queen's Press. ISBN978-0-7735-3037-9. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=UtWg20olrl0C&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false.Barrier, Michael (2003). Hollywood Cartoons: American Animation in Its Golden Age. Oxford University Press. ISBN978-0-19-516729-0. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=zDJXnzMh7bkC&printsec=frontcover&client=firefox-a&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false.Barrier, Michael (2008). The Animated Man: A Life of Walt Disney. University of California Press. ISBN978-0-520-25619-4. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=te1NcjZfRmIC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false.Cohen, Karl F. (2004). Forbidden Animation: Censored Cartoons and Blacklisted Animators in America. McFarland. ISBN978-0-7864-2032-2. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=gIyH_DLYhoIC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false.Culhane, John (1983). Walt Disney's Fantasia. Harry N. Abrams Inc.. ISBN978-3-8228-0393-6.Denney, Jim; Williams, Pat (2004). How to Be Like Walt: Capturing the Disney Magic Every Day of Your Life. HCI. ISBN978-0-7573-0231-2.Ebert, Roger (1997). Questions for the Movie Answer Man. Andrews McMeel Publishing. ISBN978-0-8362-2894-6. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Y_3PAWCwSnoC&printsec=frontcover.Eagan, Daniel (2010). America's Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry. Continuum International Publishing Group. ISBN978-0-8264-2977-3. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=deq3xI8OmCkC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false.Ehrbar, Greg; Hollis, Tim (2006). Mouse Tracks: The Story of Walt Disney Records. Univ. Press of Mississippi. ISBN978-1-57806-849-4.Gabler, Neal (2008). Walt Disney: The Biography. Aurum Press Ltd. ISBN978-1-84513-342-9.Gelder, Peter Van (1990). That's Hollywood: A Behind-the-Scenes Look at 60 of the Greatest Films of All Time. Harper Collins. ISBN978-0-0609-6512-9.Goldmark, Daniel; Taylor, Yuval (2002). The Cartoon Music Book. Chicago Review Press. ISBN978-1-55652-473-8. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=5rfRdOMfTqsC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false.Grant, John (1998). Encyclopedia of Walt Disney's Animated Characters. Hyperion Books. ISBN978-0-7868-6336-5.Hall, Sheldon; Neale, Stephen (2010). Epics, Spectacles, and Blockbusters: A Hollywood History. Wayne State University Press. ISBN978-0-8143-3008-1. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=jhvrSwOOsRgC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false.Holden, Anthony (1993). Behind the Oscar: The Secret History of the Academy Awards. Simon & Schuster. ISBN978-0-671-70129-1.Kenworthy, John (2001). The Hand Behind the Mouse: An Intimate Biography of Ub Iwerks. Disney Editions. ISBN978-0-7868-5320-5.Pegolotti, James A. (2003). Deems Taylor: A Biography. UPNE. ISBN978-1-55553-587-2. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=n5G_Lqh3h4UC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false.Shepherd, Ashley (2003). Pro Tools for Video, Film and Multimedia. Cengage Learning. ISBN978-1-59200-069-2. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=EYRSVPMO4mMC&printsec=frontcover#v=onepage&q&f=false.Solomon, Charles (1995). Disney That Never Was: The Stories and Art of Five Decades of Unproduced Animation. Hyperion. ISBN978-0-7868-6037-1.Telotte, Jean-Pierre (2008). The Mouse Machine: Disney and Technology. University of Illinois Press. ISBN978-0-252-07540-7.Thomas, Bob (1994). Walt Disney: An American Original. Disney Editions. ISBN978-0-7868-6027-2.Ward, Glenn (2010). Understand Postmodernism: Teach Yourself. Hachette UK. ISBN978-1-4441-3398-1.Fantasia at the Internet Movie DatabaseFantasia at the TCM Movie DatabaseFantasia at AllRoviFantasia at Rotten TomatoesFantasia at Box Office MojoFantasia at the Big Cartoon DataBaseAnimationportalDisneyportalFilmportalRebel Without a Cause is a 1955 American drama film about emotionally confused suburban, middle-class teenagers. Directed by Nicholas Ray, it offered both social commentary and an alternative to previous films depicting delinquents in urban slum environments.[2][3] Over the years, the film has achieved landmark status for the acting of cultural icon James Dean, fresh from his Academy Award nominated role in East of Eden and who died before the film's release, his most celebrated role. In 1990, Rebel Without a Cause was added to the preserved films of the United States Library of Congress's National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."The story of a rebellious teenager who arrives at a new high school, meets a girl, disobeys his parents, and defies the local school bullies was a groundbreaking attempt to portray the moral decay of American youth, critique parental style, and explore the differences and conflicts between generations. The title was adopted from psychiatrist Robert M. Lindner's 1944 book, Rebel Without a Cause: The Hypnoanalysis of a Criminal Psychopath. The film itself, however, does not reference Lindner's book in any way.Warner Bros. released the film on October 27, 1955, less than one month after Dean's fatal car crash.Shortly after moving to Los Angeles with his parents, 17-year-old Jim Stark (James Dean) enrolls at Dawson High School. He is brought into the police station for public drunkenness, and when his mother, father and grandmother arrive at the police station to retrieve him, conflicts in Jim's family situation are introduced. His parents are often fighting; his father (Jim Backus) often tries to defend him, but Jim's mother always wins the arguments. Jim feels betrayed both by this fighting and his father's lack of moral strength, causing feelings of unrest and displacement. This shows up later in the film when he repeatedly asks his father, "What do you do when you have to be a man?"While trying to conform with fellow students at the school, he becomes involved in a dispute with a local bully named Buzz Gunderson (Corey Allen). While he tries to deal with Buzz, he becomes friends with a 15-year-old boy, John, nicknamed Plato (Sal Mineo), who was also at the police station the night of the opening scene for shooting puppies. Plato idolizes Jim, his real father having abandoned his family, and experiences many of the same problems as Jim, such as searching for meaning in life and dealing with parents who "don't understand." Jim meets Judy (Natalie Wood), whom he also recognizes from the police station, where she was brought in for being out alone after dark. She originally seems unimpressed by Jim, saying in a sarcastic tone, "I bet you're a real yo-yo." She is apparently the property of Buzz.Jim goes on a field trip to the Griffith Observatory. There he sees a dramatic presentation of the violent death of the universe. After the show, he watches as the thugs slash a tire of his car; then Buzz challenges him to a knife fight, in which Jim is loath to take part until the gang taunts him as a "chicken" (coward). He reluctantly takes part in the fight and wins, subduing Buzz by holding his switchblade up to his neck. Both Jim and Buzz receive slight injuries while fighting. The thugs challenge Jim to a "Chickie Run" with Buzz, racing stolen cars towards an abyss. The first one who jumps out of the car loses and is deemed the "chicken". The "game" ends in tragedy for Buzz when a strap on the sleeve of his leather jacket becomes looped over a handle on the car door, preventing him from jumping out before the car goes over the cliff.Jim tries to tell his parents what happened, but becomes frustrated by their failure to understand him and storms out of the house. When Jim is seen trying to go to the police by some of Buzz's friends, they decide to hunt him down, and harass Plato and Jim's family to try to find him. Judy and Jim go to an abandoned mansion; Plato finds them there (he was the one who told Jim about the house). There they act out a "fantasy family," with Jim as father, Judy as mother and Plato as child. The thugs soon discover them, and Plato brandishes his mother's gun, shooting one of the boys, and shooting at Jim and a police officer, in a clearly unstable state.Plato hides in the Observatory, which is soon besieged by the police. Jim and Judy follow him inside, and Jim convinces Plato to lend him the gun, from which he silently removes the ammunition magazine. When Plato steps out of the observatory, he becomes agitated again at the sight of the police and charges forward, brandishing his weapon. He is fatally shot by a police officer as Jim yells to the police, too late, that he has already removed the bullets. Plato is wearing Jim's jacket at the time, and as a result, Jim's parents (brought to the scene by police) think at first that Jim was shot. Mr Stark then runs to comfort Jim, openly weeping for Plato's death, and promises to be a stronger father, one that his son can depend on. Thus reconciled, Jim introduces Judy to his parents.Warner Brothers had bought the rights to Linder's book, intending to use the title for a film. Attempts to create a film version in the late 1940s eventually ended without a film or even a full script being produced. When Marlon Brando did a five-minute screen test for the studio in 1947, he was given fragments of one of the 1940s partial scripts. However, Brando was not auditioning for Rebel Without a Cause and there was no offer of any part made by the studio. The film, as it later appeared, was the result of a totally new script written in the 1950s that had nothing to do with the Brando test. The screen test is included on a 2006 special edition DVD of the 1951 film A Streetcar Named Desire.According to a Natalie Wood biography, she almost did not get the role of Judy because Nicholas Ray thought that she didn't seem fit for the role of the wild teen character. While on a night out with friends, she got into a car accident. Upon hearing this, Ray rushed to the hospital. While in delirium, Wood overheard the doctor murmuring and calling her a "goddamn juvenile delinquent"; she soon yelled to Ray, "Did you hear what he called me, Nick?! He called me a goddamn juvenile delinquent! Now do I get the part?!"[citation needed]Dawson High School, the school in the film, was actually Santa Monica High School, located in Santa Monica, California.Irving Shulman, who adapted Nicholas Ray's initial film story into the screenplay, had considered changing the name of James Dean's character to Herman Deville, according to Jurgen Miller's "Movies of the '50s". He had also originally written a number of scenes that were shot and later cut from the final version of the film. According to an AFI interview with Stewart Stern, with whom Shulman worked on the screenplay, one of the scenes was thought to be too emotionally provocative to be included in the final print of the film. It portrayed the character of Jim Stark inebriated to the point of belligerence screaming at a car in the parking lot, "It's a little jeep jeep! Little jeep, jeep!" The scene was considered unproductive to the story's progression by head editor William H. Ziegler and ultimately ended up on the cutting room floor. In 2006, members of the Lincoln Film Society petitioned to have the scene printed and archived for historical preservation.The film was in production from March 28 to May 25, 1955. When production began, Warner Bros. considered it a B-movie project, and Ray used black and white film stock. When Jack Warner realized James Dean was a rising star and a hot property, filming was switched to color stock and many scenes had to be reshot in color.The 1949 Mercury Coupe James Dean drove in the movie is part of the permanent collection at the National Automobile Museum in Reno, Nevada.The film received accolades for its story and for the performance of James Dean and the young stars who appeared, among them teenagers Natalie Wood, Sal Mineo and Dennis Hopper, along with Nick Adams and Corey Allen.The film holds a 95% fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes[4]WinsNominationsAmerican Film Institute recognitionEmpire magazine recognitionOctober 27, 1955(1955-10-27)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception5 Awards and accolades6 Cultural influence

6.1 Television and Film
6.2 Music

6.1 Television and Film6.2 Music7 References

7.1 Notes
7.2 Bibliography

7.1 Notes7.2 Bibliography8 External links6.1 Television and Film6.2 Music7.1 Notes7.2 BibliographyJames Dean as Jim StarkNatalie Wood as JudySal Mineo as John "Plato" CrawfordJim Backus as Frank StarkAnn Doran as Carol StarkCorey Allen as Buzz GundersonWilliam Hopper as Judy's fatherRochelle Hudson as Judy's motherEdward Platt as Ray FremickNick Adams as ChickFrank Mazzola as CrunchDennis Hopper as GoonVirginia Brissac as Grandma StarkJack Grinnage as MooseBeverly Long as HelenSteffi Sidney as MilJack Simmons as CookieJohn Righetti as The Big Rig1990 National Film RegistryAcademy Award for Best Supporting Actor  Sal MineoAcademy Award for Best Supporting Actress  Natalie WoodBest Writing, Motion Picture Story  Nicholas RayBAFTA Award for Best FilmBAFTA Award for Best Foreign Actor  James Dean1998 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #592005 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes

"You're tearing me apart!" - Nominated

"You're tearing me apart!" - Nominated"You're tearing me apart!" - NominatedRanked 477th on list of the 500 greatest movies of all time in 2008.[5]In The Simpsons episode, "Take My Wife, Sleaze", a parody of Rebel Without a Cause became an inspiration for Homer Simpson to form his motorcycle gang, even though he watched it with his vintage 1955 Harley-Davidson motorcycle he won at a '50s nostalgia cafe earlier in this episode.In The Sopranos episode, "Big Girls Don't Cry", Christopher Moltisanti's acting instructor assigns Chris and several classmateswhom she terms "rebels without causes" to enact the scene wherein Plato dies and Jim cries over his friend's body. The scene (which evoked in Christopher feelings about his alcoholic mother, Joanne Blundetto Moltisanti, and deceased father, Richard (Dickie) Moltisanti) touched Christopher so deeply that it inspired him to cry (and to later punch the student who played Jim's father in the scene) and his emotionally true acting impressed Christopher's teacher and classmates.In Terence Malick's film Badlands (1973), various characters note that the lead character reminds them of James Dean. The lead characters in BadlandsKit and Holly (Martin Sheen and Sissy Spacek)mildly echo those of Jim Stark and Judy (Dean and Woods). A Mercury Eight also appears in the film.The movie "Cool As Ice" is supposed to be a remake of Rebel Without a Cause.In the show Futurama, the outfit of Philip J. Fry is based on Jim's outfit.In the SpongeBob SquarePants episode "Prehibernation Week", SpongeBob says, "They're tearing me apart." in reference to the games that he and Sandy had been playing. This is a reference to Jim's line, "You're tearing me apart.", when Jim's parents are arguing at the police station and have different opinions about Jim.In the 1983 film "Christine", the character of Arnold "Arnie" Cunningham is intended to gradually resemble James Dean's character throughout the film. Namely his hair and trademark red jacket. This may be due in part to the urban legend of Dean also owning a haunted car.The Looney Tunes Show episode "Rebel Without a Glove", came from the movie titleIn 1995 Nonesuch Records issued an album of music from both "East of Eden" and "Rebel Without a Cause" by the London Sinfonietta conducted by John Adams.Prinz Pi's (german musician) album Rebell ohne Grund (2011) is named after "Rebel Without a Cause"Rap Group Public Enemy made a song called "Rebel Without A Pause".Bonnie Tyler in 1986 made a song called Rebel Without a Clue.The Bellamy Brothers in 1988 made a song called Rebels Without a Clue.The phrase Rebel without a clue also occurs in the 1989 song I'll Be You by The Replacements, which inspired Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers to include it onto their 1991 song Into the Great Wide Open.Track 5 on the Every Time I Die album, The Big Dirty, is named Rebel Without Applause.Locnville made a song named "James Dean"Joni Mitchell included clips from "Rebel Without a Cause" in her concert film, Shadows and Light, recorded in 1979 and released in 1980.Shenandoah mentions Dean and Wood in the song "I Wanna Be Loved Like That." The beginning of the song states: "Natalie Wood gave her heart to James Dean/ High school rebel and a teenage queen/ Standing together in an angry world/ One boy fighting for one girl."In Sleeping with Sirens's 2010 With ears to see and eyes to hear, there is a song called "If I'm James Dean, you're Audrey Hepburn". In their acoustic EP they released afterwards, there is the acoustic version simple calles "James Dean & Audrey Hepburn".Frascella, Lawrence and Weisel, Al: Live Fast, Die Young: The Wild Ride of Making Rebel Without a Cause. Touchstone, 2005. ISBN 0-7432-6082-1Rebel Without a Cause at the Internet Movie DatabaseRebel Without a Cause at the TCM Movie DatabaseRebel Without a Cause at AllRoviRebel Without a Cause at Rotten TomatoesBehind the Scenes of Rebel Without a Cause: James Dean, Sal Mineo, Natalie WoodLiving Fast, Dying Young, in Life and Onscreen"The Making of Rebel Without a Cause by Sam Kashner A Vanity Fair piece about Nicholas Ray with a particular focus on Rebel."Rebel Without a Cause" by Raymond WeschlerNashville is a 1975 American musical Drama film directed by Robert Altman. A winner of numerous awards and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry, Nashville is generally considered to be one of Altman's most accomplished films.The film takes a snapshot of people involved in the country music and gospel music businesses in Nashville, Tennessee. It has 24 main characters, an hour of musical numbers, and multiple storylines. The characters' efforts to succeed or hold on to their success are interwoven with the efforts of a political operative and a local businessman to stage a concert rally before the state's presidential primary for a populist outsider running for president of the United States on the Replacement Party ticket. In the film's final half-hour, most of the characters come together at the outdoor concert at the Parthenon in Nashville.The large ensemble cast includes David Arkin, Barbara Baxley, Ned Beatty, Karen Black, Ronee Blakley, Keith Carradine, Geraldine Chaplin, Robert DoQui, Shelley Duvall, Allen Garfield, Henry Gibson, Scott Glenn, Jeff Goldblum, Barbara Harris, David Hayward, Michael Murphy, Allan F. Nicholls, Cristina Raines, Bert Remsen, Lily Tomlin, Gwen Welles, and Keenan Wynn.The overarching plot takes place over five days leading up to a political rally for Replacement Party candidate Hal Phillip Walker, who is never seen throughout the entire movie. The story follows 25 characters roaming around Nashville, in search of some sort of goal through their own (often overlapping) story arcs.Day OneThe film opens with a campaign van for presidential candidate Hal Phillip Walker driving around Nashville as an external loudspeaker blares Walker's folksy political aphorisms, juxtaposed with country superstar Haven Hamilton (Henry Gibson) recording an overblown patriotic song intended to commemorate the upcoming Bicentennial, and growing irritated with the accompanying musicians in the studio. An Englishwoman named Opal (Geraldine Chaplin) who claims to be working on a documentary for the BBC appears in the studio but is told to leave by Haven. Down the hall from Haven's session is Linnea Reese (Lily Tomlin), a white gospel singer recording a song with a black choir.Later that day, popular country singer Barbara Jean (Ronee Blakley) is returning to Nashville, having recovered from a burn accident, and the elite of Nashville's music scene - including Haven Hamilton and his companion Lady Pearl (Barbara Baxley) have converged on Berry Field to greet her plane as it arrives. Also present are Pfc. Glenn Kelly (Scott Glenn) and the popular folk trio "Bill, Mary, and Tom" who are in town to record an album. Bill (Allan F. Nicholls) and Mary (Cristina Raines) are married, but largely unhappy, partly due to the fact that she is in love with womanizer Tom (Keith Carradine). Meanwhile, Mr. Green (Keenan Wynn) arrives at the airport to pick up his niece Martha (Shelley Duvall), aka "L.A. Joan", a teenage groupie who has come to Nashville ostensibly to visit her aunt Esther Green who is sick in the hospital. However, Martha repeatedly puts off visiting her aunt in favor of chasing after male musicians. Working at the airport restaurant are African-American cook Wade Cooley (Robert DoQui), and his pretty waitress friend, Sueleen Gay (Gwen Welles), an aspiring country singer who refuses to recognize that she can't carry a tune.After greeting the crowds on the tarmac, Barbara Jean faints due to the heat, and her handlers, headed by her domineering husband-manager Barnett (Allen Garfield), rush her to the hospital. Barbara Jean's appearance having been cut short, those in attendance depart the airport and wind up stranded on the highway after a pile-up occurs. During the commotion, Winifred (Barbara Harris), an aspiring country singer, runs away from her husband, Star (Bert Remsen), after he refuses to take her to the Grand Ole Opry. Star gives a ride to Kenny Frasier (David Hayward), who has just arrived in town carrying a violin case. Opal takes advantage of the traffic jam to interview first Linnea and then Tommy Brown (Timmy Brown), an African-American country singer who is performing at the Opry. Tommy and his entourage go to Lady Pearl's club but Wade, who is drinking and trying to pick up white girls at the bar, insults Tommy for being too "white" and starts a fight.Linnea's husband Del Reese (Ned Beatty) is working with political organizer John Triplette (Michael Murphy) to plan a small fundraiser and a large outdoor concert gala for the Walker campaign. Sueleen appears at a local club's open mike night in a provocative outfit, and despite her lack of singing ability, club manager Trout (Merle Kilgore) recommends her to Triplette for the fundraiser based on her appearance. Winifred shows up at Trout's club trying to recruit musicians to record a demo with her, but Star sees her and chases her out. Del invites Triplette for family dinner with Linnea and their two deaf children. Linnea and Del are having communications problems and she focuses on the children rather than on him. In the middle of dinner, Tom calls trying to make a date with Linnea, but she puts him off, so he takes Opal back to his room instead. Pfc. Kelly sneaks into Barbara Jean's hospital room and sits in the chair by her bed all night, watching her sleep.Day TwoTom calls Linnea again but, with Del listening on the other line, Linnea yells at Tom and tells him not to call her any more. Kenny rents a room from Mr. Green. Haven Hamilton throws a pre-show party at his house before the evening's Grand Ole Opry performance. At the party, Triplette tries to persuade Haven to perform at the Walker gala by telling him that if Walker is elected, Walker would back Haven for state governor. Haven says he'll give Triplette his decision after the Opry show that night.Later, Tommy Brown, Haven, and Connie White (Karen Black) all perform at the Opry. Connie is substituting for the hospitalized Barbara Jean. Winifred tries unsuccessfully to get backstage. At the hospital, Barbara Jean and Barnett have an argument because he is going to the after-show gathering to thank Connie for substituting at the last minute. Barbara Jean doesn't want him to go and he accuses her of having another nervous breakdown like she did previously. Barnett finally subdues Barbara Jean and leaves, but Connie doesn't seem happy to see him. Haven tells Triplette that Barbara Jean and Connie never appear on the same stage, and that he (Haven) will appear anyplace Barbara Jean also appears. Bill gets upset when his wife Mary doesn't show up all evening; she is sleeping with Tom.Day ThreeIt is Sunday morning and the characters are shown attending various Catholic and Protestant church services. At the hospital chapel, Barbara Jean sings a hymn from her wheelchair while Mr. Green and Pfc. Kelly, among others, watch. Mr. Green tells Kelly how he and his wife lost their son in WWII. Opal wanders alone through a huge auto scrapyard making free-form poetic speeches about the cars into her tape recorder. Haven, Tommy Brown and their families attend the stock car races, where Winifred also attempts to sing on a small stage but cannot be heard. Bill and Mary argue in their hotel room and are interrupted by Triplette, who wants to recruit them for the Walker concert gala. Tom tries to get chauffeur Norman (David Arkin) to score him some pills.Day FourOpal walks alone through a large school bus parking lot making more strange observations into her tape recorder. Barbara Jean is discharged from the hospital at the same time Mr. Green shows up to visit his sick wife. Barbara Jean asks after his wife and sends her regards. After Barbara Jean and her entourage have left, a nurse tells Mr. Green his wife died earlier that morning. Back at Mr. Green's house, Kenny gets upset when Martha tries to look at his violin case.Barbara Jean performs at Opryland USA. Triplette and Del attend and try to convince Barnett to have Barbara Jean play the Walker concert gala at the Parthenon the next day, but he refuses. Barbara Jean gets through the first couple of songs all right, but then begins to tell rambling stories about her childhood instead of starting the next song. After several false starts, Barnett escorts her from the stage and tells the disappointed audience that they can come to the Parthenon tomorrow and see Barbara Jean perform for free, thus committing her to the Walker concert.Tom calls Linnea and invites her to meet him that night at a club where he is playing. Linnea arrives but sits by herself because Martha is trying to pick Tom up. Mary and Bill are also there, and Opal sits with them and talks about how she slept with Tom, causing Mary to become upset. Wade tries unsuccessfully to pick up Linnea, while Norman tries equally unsuccessfully to pick up Opal. Tom sings "I'm Easy" and Linnea, moved, goes back to his room where they make love. When Linnea needs to leave, Tom calls another woman and has a romantic conversation within Linnea's earshot while she is getting dressed to go home.Sueleen appears at the all-male Walker fundraiser, but is booed off the stage when she sings poorly and doesn't take off her clothes. Del and Triplette explain that the men expect her to strip and that if she does so, they will let her sing the next day at the Parthenon with Barbara Jean. Sueleen is visibly upset but strips anyway. Winifred shows up at the fundraiser hoping to get a chance to sing, but after she sees what is going on, she stays hidden behind a curtain. Del drives Sueleen home and drunkenly comes on to her, but she is rescued by Wade. After he hears what happened, Wade tells Sueleen she can't sing and asks her to go back to Detroit with him the next day. Sueleen refuses because she is determined to sing at the Parthenon with Barbara Jean.Day FiveThe performers, audience and Walker and his entourage arrive for the Parthenon concert. In the performing lineup are Haven, Barbara Jean, Linnea and her choir, Bill, Mary and Tom, Sueleen, and Winifred who has shown up again hoping for a chance to sing. Barnett gets upset because Barbara Jean will have to perform in front of a large Walker advertisement, but has to go along with it because his wife's career will be harmed if he pulls her out of the show. Mr. Green and Kenny attend Esther Green's burial service and Mr. Green leaves angrily, vowing to find Martha (who is not at the service) and make her show some respect to her aunt. Mr. Green and Kenny go to the Parthenon to look for Martha.The Walker gala starts and Haven and Barbara Jean perform a song together, then Barbara Jean sings a solo song. At the end of the song, Kenny takes a gun from his violin case and shoots Haven and Barbara Jean. Pfc. Kelly disarms Kenny as chaos breaks out. Barbara Jean is carried bleeding and unconscious from the stage. Haven tries to calm the crowd by exhorting them to sing. As he is led from the stage for treatment of his wounds, he hands the microphone off to Winifred, who begins to sing "It Don't Worry Me" and is joined by Linnea's gospel choir. The film ends with the audience raptly listening to Winifred's song - she has finally gotten her big break.There are cameo appearances by Elliott Gould, Julie Christie, Vassar Clements and Howard K. Smith, all playing themselves. Gould and Christie were passing through Nashville when Altman added them. Altman himself plays Bob an unseen producer who in the beginning of the film is producing Haven Hamilton's song 200 Years. He can be heard on a speaker when Hamilton gets agitated by Frog's inept piano playing.The film was shot on location in Nashville in the summer (late July, August, and early September) of 1974. All the musical scenes are 'live' concert footage.The original script was written by Joan Tewkesbury, who had collaborated with Altman on several of his films, including McCabe and Mrs. Miller and Thieves Like Us. Altman had been approached to work on a film set in Nashville which he wasn't interested in. However, he became interested in the setting and sent Tewkesbury to Nashville to observe the area and its citizenry. Tewkesbury's diary of her trip provided the basis for the film's script, with many observations making it into the finished film, such as the highway pileup. However, as with most Altman projects, much of the dialogue was improvised with the script acting as a "blueprint" dictating the actions of the characters and the plot. Other Altman trademarks prevalent in the film are the large ensemble cast and the overlapping dialogue with several characters speaking at once.Several characters are based on real country music figures: Henry Gibson's Haven Hamilton is a composite of Roy Acuff, Hank Snow, and Porter Wagoner; Ronee Blakely's Barbara Jean is based on Loretta Lynn; the black country singer Tommy Brown (played by Timothy Brown) is based on Charley Pride; and the feuding folk trio is based on Peter, Paul and Mary; within the trio, the married couple of Bill and Mary were inspired by Bill Danoff and Taffy Nivert, who later became Starland Vocal Band.[2] Keith Carradine's character is believed to be inspired by Kris Kristofferson and Karen Black's Connie White strongly resembles Lynn Anderson.The speeches given by candidate Hal Phillip Walker, who is never seen, were written by actor-screenwriter Thomas Hal Phillips. Walker, the climactic assassination, the political theme and various associated characters (such as Haven Hamilton) do not appear in the earliest versions of the script.Altman had enough footage to produce a four-hour film, and assistant director Alan Rudolph suggested he create an expanded version of "Nashville" to be shown in two parts, "Nashville Red" and "Nashville Blue," but the film ultimately remained intact.[3] After a rush of critical acclaim, ABC expressed interest in a proposal for a ten-hour miniseries of "Nashville", based on the footage not used in the final cut, but plans for the project were scrapped.[3] The additional footage has not been made available on DVD releases.However, in a 2000 interview with the AV Club, Altman disputed the claim that he had several hours worth of deleted scenes to cut another feature-length film (or two) out of. Altman claimed that there "were no deleted scenes" and that "almost everything we shot is in that film". Altman further stated the unseen, extra footage that wasn't used in the final cut of the film was mainly music and not much else.Nashville was lauded by major film critics. Pauline Kael described it as "the funniest epic vision of America ever to reach the screen",[4] and both Roger Ebert and Leonard Maltin gave the film four-star reviews and called it the best film of 1975. In his original review, Ebert wrote, "...after I saw it I felt more alive, I felt I understood more about people, I felt somehow wiser. It's that good a movie."[5] On August 6, 2000, he included it in his Great Movies compilation.[6] The film currently has 95% Fresh Rating on Rotten Tomatoes. The film had 100% Fresh rating when it is rated by "Top Critics".In 1992, Nashville was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 2007, the movie was ranked #59 on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - 10th Anniversary Edition list; it did not appear on the original 1998 list. The song "I'm Easy" was named the 81st Best Song of All Time by the American Film Institute (AFI).The film had an estimated budget of $2 million. The film was a box office success, grossing $9,984,123 domestically, well above its $2 million budget. The film's worldwide total is unknown.The movie was widely despised by the mainstream country-music community at the time of its release; many artists believed it ridiculed their talent and sincerity.[3]The film won an Oscar for Best Original Song and a Golden Globe for Best Original Song - Motion Picture (awarded to Keith Carradine for "I'm Easy"). Ronee Blakley and Lily Tomlin were nominated for Best Supporting Actress, Robert Altman was nominated for Best Director, and the film itself was nominated for Best Picture. It won a BAFTA Film Award for "Best Sound Track." Altman won for best director from: Cartagena Film Festival; Kansas City Film Critics Circle Awards; National Board of Review; National Society of Film Critics Awards; and the New York Film Critics Circle Awards. Lily Tomlin was awarded the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actress.American Film Institute recognitionThe actors and actresses composed some of the songs they performed in the film. Ronee Blakley contributed several songs, including those performed by Timothy Brown. Karen Black wrote the songs she performed in character as Connie White. Keith Carradine wrote "I'm Easy", which won an Academy Award for Best Original Song and a Golden Globe for Best Original Song - Motion Picture. Carradine also wrote "It Don't Worry Me", which is heard on the soundtrack throughout the film, and is the closing number performed by Barbara Harris onstage at the Parthenon.Film score composer Richard Baskin composed songs for Henry Gibson to sing in character as Haven Hamilton.Several respected Nashville session musicians took part in the music recording and in the film itself, including violinist Vassar Clements and guitarist Harold Bradley.While the music was viewed in the Nashville music industry as mean-spirited satire,[3] the songs have achieved a cult-status among alternative country musicians. In 2002, the album, A Tribute to Robert Altman's Nashville was released, featuring interpretations of the film's songs by Canadian alt-country figures, including Carolyn Mark, Kelly Hogan and Neko Case.Spanky and Our Gang covered both "Since You've Gone" and "Dues" on their 1975 album Change.Songs on the film's soundtrack, but not on the soundtrack album:Plans were discussed for a sequel set twelve years later and titled Nashville 12, and most of the original players agreed to appear. In the script for the sequel, Lily Tomlin's character, Linnea, is running for political office; and Barnett now managing Connie White and obsessed with a Barbara Jean impersonator.[3]The shooting of Barbara Jean in the climactic scene predated, but eerily mirrored, what would be the murder of John Lennon in 1980. In an interview on the DVD, Altman remarks that after Lennon's death, reporters questioned the director about Nashville and its harbinger of the assassination of a music star.June 11, 1975(1975-06-11)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception

4.1 Critical response
4.2 Box office
4.3 Response in Nashville

4.1 Critical response4.2 Box office4.3 Response in Nashville5 Awards

5.1 Academy Awards
5.2 Golden Globes

5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Golden Globes6 Soundtrack

6.1 Other songs in the film

6.1 Other songs in the film7 Legacy

7.1 Sequel
7.2 Climax

7.1 Sequel7.2 Climax8 References9 External links4.1 Critical response4.2 Box office4.3 Response in Nashville5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Golden Globes6.1 Other songs in the film7.1 Sequel7.2 ClimaxDavid Arkin as Norman, a nervous, self-conscious chauffeur who doesn't understand that celebrities want him to shut up and just do his job.Barbara Baxley as Lady Pearl, Haven Hamilton's companion. She manages a bluegrass night at a downtown club. She appears to be inebriated for most of the film, and is dedicated to the late John and Bobby Kennedy. She is Roman Catholic.Ned Beatty as Delbert "Del" Reese is a good old boy with a struggling marriage and a wandering eye. He is Haven Hamilton's lawyer and the local organizer for the Hal Philip Walker campaign.Karen Black as Connie White, a glamorous country singer of mediocre talent and rival of Barbara Jean.Ronee Blakely, in her first film role, plays Barbara Jean, an emotionally fragile country singer who is the sweetheart of Nashville.Timothy Brown as Tommy Brown, an African American singer who performs at the Grand Ole Opry.Keith Carradine as Tom Frank, a member of the folk rock trio Bill, Mary and Tom. He is attempting to create a career as a solo artist. Lean, handsome and dashing, he is also rude and insolent; his successful womanizing leaves him empty and irritable.Geraldine Chaplin as Opal, a wacky, celebrity-obsessed, self-absorbed BBC radio reporter. As a surrogate for the audience, she provides an outsider's perspective on the business of music. She is never seen with a film crew, she never shows anyone any official credentials and complains at one point that her cameraman is never around when she needs him. She also erroneously refers to her employer as the 'British Broadcasting Company' (the C in BBC actually standing for 'Corporation'). Film critic Roger Ebert suggests, in his "Great Movies" article, that she may not even be a filmmaker but just a groupie who uses fake credentials to gain access to famous people.Robert DoQui as Wade Cooley, a cook at the airport restaurant and protector of Sueleen Gay.Shelley Duvall as Martha, the niece of Mr. Green. Martha, who has changed her name to L.A. Joan, has come to Nashville ostensibly to visit Mrs. Green, but spends all her time changing her clothes and wigs, and chasing men.Allen Garfield as Barnett, Barbara Jean's husband and manager. Barnett strenuously protects Barbara Jean's career, but when they are together their relationship is strained and he privately bullies her into a nervous wreck.Henry Gibson as Haven Hamilton, a Nudie-suit-wearing star of the Grand Ole Opry. His political ambitions play a pivotal role in the film's plot.Scott Glenn as Pfc. Glenn Kelly, a Vietnam War veteran who has come to Nashville to see Barbara Jean perform. It is unclear whether or not he is stalking her.Jeff Goldblum as the silent Tricycle Man. He rides his long, low-slung three-wheel motorcycle everywhere, and serves as a structural connector for scenes in the film.Barbara Harris as Winifred, an aspiring singer-songwriter who runs away from her irascible husband, Star. Despite her straggly appearance and repeated failures to get a break, she understands that the music business is a business, and when her opportunity comes, she is ready.David Hayward as Kenny Frasier, a loner who "looks like Howdy Doody", carries a violin case and rents a room from Mr. Green.Michael Murphy as the smooth-talking, duplicitous John Triplette, an organizer for Hal Philip Walker's presidential campaign.Allan F. Nicholls as Bill, one of the folk trio, Bill, Mary and Tom. He is married to Mary. During the film his marriage is tested.Dave Peel as Bud Hamilton, the sweet-natured son of Haven Hamilton. Bud, who went to Harvard, speaks without an accent. He handles his father's business affairs.Cristina Raines as Mary, one of the folk trio, Bill, Mary and Tom. She is married to Bill, but is in love with Tom Franks.Bert Remsen as Star, who appears in the film only to chase after his runaway wife Winifred.Lily Tomlin as Linnea Reese, one of the major characters. Linnea is a gospel singer, wife of Delbert Reese and loving mother of two deaf children.Gwen Welles as Sueleen Gay, a pretty young waitress at the airport lunch counter and a talentless, aspiring country singer. Her refusal to recognize her limitations and face reality gets her in trouble.Keenan Wynn as Mr. Green, the aging uncle of Martha. His wife is sick and he spends the film trying to get Martha to visit her.Richard Baskin, the film's musical supervisor, wrote several of the songs performed in the film. He has a cameo as Frog, a session musician, appearing in several scenes.Merle Kilgore as Trout, the owner of a club that has an open-mic talent night that gives Sueleen Gay what she believes is her big break as a singer.Best Original Song - awarded to Keith Carradine for "I'm Easy".Best PictureBest Director - Robert AltmanBest Supporting Actress - Ronee BlakleyBest Supporting Actress - Lily TomlinBest Original Song - Motion Picture - "I'm Easy"Best Motion Picture - DramaBest Director - Robert AltmanBest Supporting Actor - Henry GibsonBest Supporting Actress - Ronee BlakleyBest Supporting Actress - Geraldine ChaplinBest Supporting Actress - Barbara HarrisBest Supporting Actress - Lily Tomlin2007 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #592004 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs:

"I'm Easy" #81

"I'm Easy" #81"I'm Easy" #81"Yes, I Do", composed by Richard Baskin and Lily Tomlin; performed by Lily Tomlin"Down to the River", written and performed by Ronee Blakley"Let Me Be the One", written by Richard Baskin; performed by Gwen Welles"Sing a Song", written by Joe Raposo"The Heart of a Gentle Woman", written and performed by Dave Peel"The Day I Looked Jesus in the Eye", written by Richard Baskin and Robert Altman"I Don't Know If I Found It in You", written and performed by Karen Black"Swing Low, Sweet Chariot", traditional"Honey", written and performed by Keith Carradine"I Never Get Enough", written by Richard Baskin and Ben Raleigh; performed by Gwen Welles"Rose's Cafe", written and performed by Allan F. Nicholls"Old Man Mississippi", written by Juan Grizzle"My Baby's Cookin' in Another Man's Pan", written and performed by Jonnie Barnett"Since You've Gone", written by Gary Busey, performed by Allan F. Nicholls, Cristina Raines and Keith Carradine"Trouble in the U.S.A.", written by Arlene Barnett"In the Garden", written by C. Austin Miles, performed by Ronee BlakleyNashville at the Internet Movie DatabaseNashville at AllRoviNashville at Rotten TomatoesSalon.com's 25th anniversary tributeRaiders of the Lost Ark (later marketed as Indiana Jones and the Raiders of the Lost Ark) is a 1981 American action-adventure film directed by Steven Spielberg, produced by George Lucas, and starring Harrison Ford. It is the first (chronologically, the second) installment in the Indiana Jones franchise. It puts Indiana Jones (Ford) against a group of Nazis who are searching for the Ark of the Covenant which Adolf Hitler believes will make their army invincible. The film co-stars Karen Allen as Indiana's former lover, Marion Ravenwood; Paul Freeman as Indiana's nemesis, French archaeologist Ren Belloq; John Rhys-Davies as Indiana's sidekick, Sallah; Ronald Lacey as Gestapo agent Arnold Toht; and Denholm Elliott as Indiana's colleague, Marcus Brody.The film originated with Lucas' desire to create a modern version of the serials of the 1930s and 1940s. Production was based at Elstree Studios, England; but filming also took place in La Rochelle, Tunisia, Hawaii, and California from June to September 1980.Released on June 12, 1981, Raiders of the Lost Ark became the year's top-grossing film[2] and remains one of the highest-grossing films ever made.[2] It was nominated for nine Academy Awards in 1982, including Best Picture, and won four (Best Art Direction, Best Film Editing, Best Sound, Best Visual Effects) as well as winning a fifth Special Achievement Academy Award in Sound Effects Editing. The film's critical and popular success led to three additional films, Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom (1984), Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (1989), and Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull (2008), a television series, The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles (19921996), and 15 video games as of 2009. In 1999, the film was included in the United States Library of Congress' National Film Registry as having been deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."In 1936, archaeologist Indiana Jones braves an ancient Peruvian temple filled with booby traps to retrieve a golden idol. Upon fleeing the temple, Indiana is confronted by rival archaeologist Ren Belloq and the indigenous Hovitos. Surrounded and outnumbered, Indiana is forced to surrender the idol to Belloq and escapes aboard a waiting Waco seaplane, in the process revealing his fear of snakes.Shortly after returning to the college in the United States where he teaches archaeology, Indiana is interviewed by two Army intelligence agents. They inform him that the Nazis, in their quest for occult power, are searching for his old mentor, Abner Ravenwood, who is the leading expert on the ancient Egyptian city of Tanis and possesses the headpiece of an artifact called the Staff of Ra. Indiana deduces that the Nazis are searching for Tanis because it is believed to be the location of the Ark of the Covenant, the biblical chest built by the Israelites to contain the fragments of the Ten Commandments; the Nazis believe that if they acquire it, their armies will become invincible. The Staff of Ra, meanwhile, is the key to finding the Well of Souls, a secret chamber in which the Ark is buried. The agents subsequently authorize Indiana to recover the Ark before the Nazis. Indiana travels to Nepal, only to find that Ravenwood has died and that the headpiece is in the possession of his daughter, Marion, Indiana's embittered former lover. Indiana offers to buy the headpiece for three thousand dollars, plus two thousand more when they return to the United States. Marion's tavern is suddenly raided by a group of thugs commanded by Nazi agent Toht. The tavern is burned down in the ensuing fight, during which Toht burns his hand on the searing hot headpiece as he tries to grab it. Indiana and Marion escape with the headpiece, with Marion declaring she will accompany Indiana in his search for the Ark so he can repay his debt.They travel to Cairo where they learn from Indiana's friend Sallah, a skilled excavator, that Belloq and the Nazis, led by Colonel Dietrich, are currently digging for the Well of Souls with a replica of the headpiece modeled after the scar on Toht's hand. In a bazaar, Nazi operatives attempt to kidnap Marion and as Indiana chases after them it appears that she dies in an explosion. While deciphering the markings on the headpiece, Indiana and Sallah realize that the Nazis have miscalculated the location of the Well of Souls. Using this to their advantage, they infiltrate the Nazi dig and use the Staff of Ra to determine the location correctly and uncover the Well of Souls, which is filled with snakes. Indiana fends off the snakes and acquires the Ark, but Belloq, Dietrich and the Nazis arrive to take it. They toss Marion into the well with Indiana and seal them in, but they manage to escape. After a fistfight with a giant Nazi mechanic, blowing up a flying wing on the airstrip, and chasing down a convoy of trucks, Indiana takes back the Ark before it can be shipped to Berlin.Indiana and Marion leave Cairo to escort the Ark to England on board a tramp steamer. The next morning, their boat is boarded by Belloq, Dietrich and the Nazis, who once again steal the Ark and kidnap Marion. Indiana stows away on their U-boat and follows them to an isolated island in the Aegean Sea where Belloq plans to test the power of the Ark before presenting it to Hitler. Indiana reveals himself and threatens to destroy the Ark with a rocket-propelled grenade launcher, but Belloq calls his bluff, knowing Indy cannot bear to eradicate an important historical artifact.Indiana surrenders and is tied to a post with Marion as Belloq performs a ceremonial opening of the Ark, which appears to contain nothing but sand. Suddenly, spirits resembling Old Testament Seraphim emerge from the Ark. Aware of the supernatural danger of looking at the opened Ark, Indiana warns Marion to close her eyes. The apparitions suddenly morph into "angels of death", and lightning bolts begin flying out of the Ark, gruesomely killing the Nazi soldiers, while Belloq, Dietrich and Toht meet even more gruesome fates. The fires rise into the sky, then fall back down to Earth and the Ark closes with a crack of thunder.Back in Washington, D.C., the Army intelligence agents tell a suspicious Indiana and Brody that the Ark "is someplace safe" to be studied by "top men". In reality, the Ark is sealed in a wooden crate labeled "top secret" and stored in a giant government warehouse filled with countless similar crates.Producer Frank Marshall played a pilot in the airplane fight sequence. The stunt team was ill, so he took the role instead. The result was three days in a hot cockpit, which he joked was over "140 degrees".[3] Pat Roach plays the Nazi mechanic with whom Jones brawls in this sequence, as well as a massive sherpa who battles Jones in Marion's bar. He had the rare opportunity to be killed twice in one film.[10] Special-effects supervisor Dennis Muren made a cameo as a Nazi spy on the seaplane Jones takes from San Francisco to Manila.[11]In 1973, George Lucas wrote The Adventures of Indiana Smith.[12] Like Star Wars, which he also wrote, it was an opportunity to create a modern version of the film serials of the 1930s and 1940s.[3] Lucas discussed the concept with Philip Kaufman, who worked with him for several weeks and came up with the Ark of the Covenant as the plot device.[13] Kaufman was told about the Ark by his dentist when he was a child.[14] The project stalled when Clint Eastwood hired Kaufman to direct The Outlaw Josey Wales.[13] Lucas eventually shelved the idea, deciding to concentrate on his outer space adventure which would become Star Wars. In late May 1977, Lucas was in Maui, trying to escape the enormous success of Star Wars. Friend and colleague Steven Spielberg was also there, on vacation from work on Close Encounters of the Third Kind. While building a sand castle at Mauna Kea,[15] Spielberg expressed an interest in directing a James Bond film. Lucas convinced his friend Spielberg that he had conceived a character "better than James Bond" and explained the concept of Raiders of the Lost Ark. Spielberg loved it, calling it "a James Bond film without the hardware,"[16] although Spielberg told Lucas that the surname Smith was not right for the character, Lucas replied, "OK. What about Jones?" Indiana was the name of Lucas' Alaskan Malamute.[3]The following year, Lucas focused on developing Raiders and the Star Wars sequel The Empire Strikes Back, during which Lawrence Kasdan and Frank Marshall joined the project as screenwriter and producer respectively. Between January 23January 27, 1978, for nine hours a day, Lucas, Kasdan, and Spielberg discussed the story and visual ideas. Spielberg came up with Jones being chased by a boulder,[3] which was inspired by "The Seven Cities of Cibola," an Uncle Scrooge comic by Carl Barks. Lucas later acknowledged that the idea for the idol mechanism in the opening scene, and deadly traps later in the film were inspired by several Uncle Scrooge comics.[17] Lucas came up with a submarine, a monkey giving the Hitler salute, and Marion punching Jones in Nepal.[16] Kasdan used a 100-page transcript of their conversations for his first script draft,[18] which he worked on for six months.[3] Ultimately some of their ideas were too grand and had to be cut: a mine chase,[19] an escape in Shanghai using a rolling gong as a shield,[20] and a jump from an airplane in a raft, all of which made it into the prequel, Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom.[3]Spielberg and Lucas disagreed on the character: although Lucas saw him as a Bondian playboy, Spielberg and Kasdan felt the professor and adventurer elements of the character made him complex enough. Spielberg had a darker vision of Jones, interpreting him as an alcoholic similar to Humphrey Bogart's character Fred C. Dobbs in The Treasure of the Sierra Madre. This characterization fell away during the later drafts.[16] Spielberg also initially conceived of Toht as having a robotic arm, which Lucas rejected as falling into science-fiction. Comic book artist Jim Steranko was also commissioned to produce original illustrations for pre-production, which heavily influenced Spielberg's decisions in both the look of the film and the character of Indiana Jones himself.[21]Initially, the film was rejected by every major studio in Hollywood, as most executives thought that the story was too over the top and would be exceedingly expensive to produce. Eventually Paramount agreed to finance the film, with Lucas negotiating a five picture deal. By April 1980, Kasdan's fifth draft was produced, and production was getting ready to shoot at Elstree Studios, with Lucas trying to keep costs down.[5] With four illustrators, Raiders of the Lost Ark was Spielberg's most storyboarded film of his career to date, further helping the film economically. He and Lucas agreed on a tight schedule to keep costs down, and to stylistically follow the "quick and dirty" feel of the old Saturday matine serials. Special effects were done using puppets, miniature models, animation, and camera trickery.[3] "We didn't do 30 or 40 takes; usually only four. It was like silent film--shoot only what you need, no waste," Spielberg said. "Had I had more time and money, it would have turned out a pretentious movie." Lucas also directed some of the second unit.[22]Filming began on June 23, 1980, at La Rochelle, France, for scenes involving the Nazi submarine,[5] which was rented from the production of Das Boot. The U-boat pen was a genuine one that had survived from World War II.[3] The crew moved to Elstree Studios[5] for scenes involving the Well of Souls, the interiors of the temple in the opening sequence and Marion Ravenwood's bar.[23] The Well of Souls required 7,000 snakes, though the only venomous snakes on set were the cobras. However, one crew member was bitten by a python on set.[3] To shoot the scene where Indiana comes face-to-face with the cobra, a glass sheet was put between Ford and the reptile, which is partially visible in the film when the light hits it at a certain angle.[3] Unlike the character he portrayed, Ford does not actually have a fear of snakes; Spielberg was not afraid either, but seeing all the snakes on the set writhing around made him "want to puke".[3] The opening sequence featured live tarantulas: Alfred Molina had to have many put on him, but they did not move until a female tarantula was introduced. A fibreglass boulder 22feet (7m) in diameter was made for the scene where Indiana escapes the temple; Spielberg was so impressed by production designer Norman Reynolds' realization of his idea, that he gave it a more prominent role in the film and told Reynolds to increase the length of the boulder run by 50 feet (15m).[24]All of the scenes set in Egypt were filmed in Tunisia, and the canyon where Indiana threatens to blow up the Ark was shot in Sidi Bouhlel, just outside of Tozeur.[25] The location was previously used in the Tatooine scenes from 1977's Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, since many people in the location crew were the same for both films.[3] Notably, that canyon was exactly the same location where R2-D2 was attacked by Jawas.[3] The Tanis scenes were filmed in nearby Sedala and it was a harsh experience due to the heat and disease. Several members of the cast and crew fell ill; Rhys-Davies in particular defecated in his costume during one shot.[3] Spielberg averted diseases by only eating canned foods from England, but did not like the area and quickly pushed forward a scheduled six-week shoot to four-and-a-half weeks. Much was improvised there: the scene where Marion puts on her dress and attempts to leave Belloq's tent was improvised, as was the entire plane fight. During shooting of that scene, Ford tore his cruciate ligament in his left leg as a wheel went over his knee, but he did not accept local medical help and simply put ice over it.[3] The fight scenes in the town were filmed in Kairouan; by then Ford was suffering from dysentery and did not want to film a lengthy fight scene in which Indiana uses his whip to fight off a swordsman. He said to Spielberg "Let's just shoot the fucker." Spielberg agreed, scrapped the rest of the fight scene, and filmed the gag of Indiana quickly gunning down the swordsman.[26] The truck chase was shot entirely by the second-unit who mostly followed Spielberg's storyboards, though they decided to add Indiana being dragged by the truck. Spielberg shot all the close-ups with Ford afterwards.[3]The interior staircase set in Washington, D.C. was filmed inside of San Francisco's City Hall. The University of the Pacific, located in Stockton, California, stands in for the exterior of the college where Jones works, while his classroom and the hall where he meets the American intelligence men was filmed at the Royal Masonic School for Girls in Rickmansworth, Hertfordshire, England. His home exteriors were filmed in the city of San Rafael, California.[23] The opening exteriors were filmed in Kauai, Hawaii, with Spielberg wrapping in September, finishing under schedule in 73days, in contrast to his previous film, 1941.[5][16] The Washington, D.C. coda, although it appeared in early drafts of the script, was not included in early edits and was added later when it was realized that there was no resolution to Jones's relationship with Marion.[27] Shots of the Douglas DC-3 Jones flies on to Nepal were taken from Lost Horizon, while a street scene was cut from a shot in The Hindenburg.[22] The filming of Indy boarding a Boeing China Clipper flying-boat was complicated by the lack of a surviving aircraft. Eventually a post-war British Short Solent flying-boat formerly owned by Howard Hughes was located in California and substituted in its place.[28]The special visual effects for Raiders were provided by Industrial Light & Magic and include: a matte shot to establish the Pan Am flying boat in the water[29] and miniature work to show the plane taking off and flying, superimposed over a map; animation effects for the beam in the Tanis map room; and a miniature car and passengers[30] superimposed over a matte painting for a shot of a Nazi car being forced off a cliff. The bulk of effects shots were featured in the climactic sequence wherein the Ark of the Covenant (which was designed by Brian Muir and Keith Short) is opened and the wrath of God is unleashed. This sequence featured animation, a woman to portray a beautiful spirit's face, rod puppet spirits moved through water to convey a sense of floating,[31] a matte painting of the island, and cloud tank effects to portray clouds. The melting of Toht's head was done by exposing a gelatine and plaster model of Ronald Lacey's head to a heat lamp with an under cranked camera, while Dietrich's crushed head was a hollow model from which air was withdrawn. The spirits were shot underwater for a ghostly look. When the film was originally submitted to the Motion Picture Association of America, it received an R rating because of the scene in which Belloq's head explodes. The filmmakers were later able to receive a PG rating when they added a veil of fire over the exploding head scene. (The PG-13 rating was not created until 1984.)[11] The firestorm that cleanses the canyon at the finish was a miniature canyon filmed upside down.[31]Ben Burtt, the sound effects supervisor, made extensive use of traditional foley work in yet another of the production's throwbacks to days of the Republic serials. He selected a 30-30 Winchester rifle for the sound of Jones' pistol. Sound effects artists struck leather jackets and baseball gloves with a baseball bat to create a variety of punching noises and body blows. For the snakes in the Well of Souls sequence, fingers running through cheese casserole and sponges sliding over cement were used for the slithering noises. The sliding lid on a toilet cistern provided the sound for the opening of the Ark. Burtt also used, as he did in many of his films, the ubiquitous Wilhelm scream when a Nazi falls from a truck. In addition to his use of such time-honored foley work, Burtt also demonstrated the modern expertise honed during his award-winning work on Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope. He employed a synthesizer for the sounds of the Ark, and mixed dolphins' and sea lions' screams for those of the spirits within.[32]John Williams composed the score for Raiders of the Lost Ark, which was the only score in the series performed by the London Symphony Orchestra, the same orchestra that performed the scores for the Star Wars saga. The score most notably features the well-known "Raiders March." This piece came to symbolize Indiana Jones and was later used in Williams' scores for the other three films. Williams originally wrote two different candidates for Indy's theme, but Spielberg enjoyed them so much that he insisted that both be used together in what became the "Raiders March".[33] The alternately eerie and apocalyptic theme for the Ark of the Covenant is also heard frequently in the score, with a more romantic melody representing Marion and, more broadly, her relationship with Jones. The score as a whole received an Oscar nomination for Best Original Score, but lost to the score to Chariots of Fire composed by Vangelis.The $18million budget film grossed $384million worldwide throughout its theatrical releases. In North America, it remains one of the top twenty highest-grossing films ever made when adjusted for inflation.[34] The film was subsequently nominated for nine Academy Awards, including Best Picture, in 1982 and won four (Best Sound, Best Film Editing, Best Visual Effects, and Best Art Direction-Set Decoration (Norman Reynolds, Leslie Dilley, and Michael D. Ford)). It also received an additional Special Achievement Award for Sound Effects Editing. It won numerous other awards, including a Grammy and Best Picture at the People's Choice Awards. Spielberg was also nominated for a Golden Globe.[35]The film received highly positive reviews from most critics. In his review for The New York Times, Vincent Canby praised the film, calling it, "one of the most deliriously funny, ingenious and stylish American adventure movies ever made."[36] Roger Ebert in his review for the Chicago Sun-Times wrote, "Two things, however, make "Raiders of the Lost Ark" more than just a technological triumph: its sense of humor and the droll style of its characters [...] We find ourselves laughing in surprise, in relief, in incredulity at the movie's ability to pile one incident upon another in an inexhaustible series of inventions."[37] He later added it to his list of "Great Movies".[38] Rolling Stone said the film was "the ultimate Saturday action matineea film so funny and exciting it can be enjoyed any day of the week."[39] Bruce Williamson of Playboy claimed: "There's more excitement in the first ten minutes of Raiders than any movie I have seen all year. By the time the explosive misadventures end, any movie-goer worth his salt ought to be exhausted."[40] Stephen Klain of Variety also praised the film. Yet, making an observation that would revisit the franchise with its next film, he felt that the film was surprisingly violent and bloody for a PG-rated film.[41]There were some dissenting voices; Sight & Sound described it as an "...expensively gift-wrapped Saturday afternoon pot-boiler,"[42] and New Hollywood champion Pauline Kael, who once contended that she only got "really rough" on large films that were destined to be hits but were nonetheless "atrocious,"[43] found the film to be a "machine-tooled adventure" from a pair of creators who "think just like the marketing division."[44] (Lucas later named a villain, played by Raiders Nazi strongman Pat Roach, in his 1988 fantasy film Willow after Kael.)[43] Today,[when?] the film is considered to be a classic of the action and adventure genres by many contemporary critics, and carries a 95% "Certified Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes.[45]Following the success of Raiders, a prequel, The Temple of Doom, and two sequels, The Last Crusade and Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, were produced. A television series, entitled The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles, was also spun off from this film, and details the early years of the character. Numerous other books, comics, and video games have also been produced.In 1998, the American Film Institute placed the film at No. 60 on its top 100 films of the first century of cinema. In 2007, AFI updated the list and placed it at No. 66. They also named it as the 10th most thrilling movie, and named Indiana Jones as the second most thrilling hero. In 1999, the film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. Indiana Jones has become an icon, being listed as Entertainment Weekly's third favorite action hero, while noting "some of the greatest action scenes ever filmed are strung together like pearls" in this film.[46]An amateur, near shot-for-shot remake was made by Chris Strompolos, Eric Zala, and Jayson Lamb, then children in Ocean Springs, Mississippi. It took the boys seven years to finish, from 1982 to 1989. After production of the film, called Raiders of the Lost Ark: The Adaptation, it was shelved and forgotten until 2003, where it was discovered by Eli Roth[47][48] and acclaimed by Spielberg himself, who congratulated the boys on their hard work and said he looked forward to seeing their names on the big screen.[49] Scott Rudin and Paramount Pictures purchased the trio's life rights with the goal of producing a film based on their adventures making their remake.[50][51]Assessing the film's legacy in 1997, Bernard Weinraub, film critic for The New York Times, which had initially reviewed the film as "deliriously funny, ingenious, and stylish",[43] maintained that "the decline in the traditional family G-rated film, for 'general' audiences, probably began" with the appearance of Raiders of the Lost Ark. "Whether by accident or design," found Weinraub, "the filmmakers made a comic nonstop action film intended mostly for adults but also for children."[43] Eight years later, in 2005, viewers of Channel 4 in the UK rated the film as the twentieth best family film of all time, with Spielberg taking best over-all director honors.[52]On Empire magazine's list of the 500 Greatest Movies of All Time, "Raiders" ranked second, beaten only by The Godfather.[53]The only video game based exclusively on the film is Raiders of the Lost Ark, released in 1982 by Atari for their Atari 2600 console.[54] The first third of the video game Indiana Jones' Greatest Adventures, released in 1994 by JVC for Nintendo's Super Nintendo Entertainment System, is based entirely on the film. Several sequences from the film are reproduced (the boulder run and the showdown with the Cairo Swordsman among them); however, several inconsistencies with the film are present in the game, such as Nazi soldiers and bats being present in the Well of Souls sequence, for example.[55] The game was developed by LucasArts and Factor 5. In the 1999 game Indiana Jones and the Infernal Machine, a bonus level brings Jones back to the Peruvian temple of the opening scene of Raiders.[56] In 2008, to coincide with the release of Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, Lego released the Lego Indiana Jones line which included building sets based on Raiders of the Lost Ark[57] and LucasArts published a video game based on the toyline, Lego Indiana Jones: The Original Adventures, which was developed by Traveller's Tales.[58]In 1981, Kenner released a 12-inch (30cm) doll of Indiana Jones, and the following year they released nine action figures of the characters in the film, three playsets, as well as toys of the Nazi truck and Jones' horse. They also released a board game. In 1984, miniature metal versions of the characters were released for a role playing game, and in 1995 Micro Machines released die-cast toys of the vehicles in the film.[59] Hasbro released action figures based on the film, ranging from 3 to 12 inches (7.6 to 30 cm), to coincide with Kingdom of the Crystal Skull on May 1, 2008.[60] Later in 2008, and in 2011, two high-end sixth scale (1:6) collectible action figures were released by Sideshow Collectibles, and Hot Toys, Ltd. respectively. A novelization by Ryder Windham was released in April 2008 by Scholastic to tie in with the release of Kingdom of the Crystal Skull. A previous novelization by Scottish author Campbell Armstrong (under the pseudonym Campbell Black) was released concurrent with the film in 1981. A book about the making of the film was also released, written by Derek Taylor.In conjunction with the Blu-ray release, a limited one-week release in IMAX theaters was announced for September 7, 2012. Steven Spielberg and sound designer Ben Burtt supervised the format conversion. No special effects or other visual elements were altered, but the audio was enhanced for surround sound.[61]The film opened at #14 and grossed $1,673,731 from 267 theaters ($6,269 theater average) during its opening weekend. As of October 7, 2012, the film has grossed $3,125,613 domestically.[62]The film was released on VHS, Betamax and VideoDisc in pan and scan only, and on laserdisc in both pan and scan and widescreen. For its 1999 VHS re-issue, the film was remastered in THX and made available in widescreen. The outer package was retitled Indiana Jones and the Raiders of the Lost Ark to correlate with the film's prequel and sequel. The subsequent DVD release in 2003 features this title as well. The title in the film itself remains unchanged, even in the restored DVD print. In the DVD, two subtle digital revisions were added. First, a connecting rod from the giant boulder to an offscreen guidance track in the opening scene was removed from behind the running Harrison Ford; second, a reflection in the glass partition separating Ford from the cobra in the Well of Souls was removed.[63] The film (along with Temple of Doom and Last Crusade) was re-released on DVD with additional extra features not included on the previous set on May 13, 2008. The film was released on Blu-ray Disc in September 2012.[64] Previously, only the latest installment in the series had been available on Blu-ray. June 12, 1981(1981-06-12)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Filming
3.3 Visual effects and sound design

3.1 Development3.2 Filming3.3 Visual effects and sound design4 Soundtrack5 Release

5.1 Reception
5.2 Impact
5.3 Merchandise
5.4 IMAX re-release
5.5 Home video

5.1 Reception5.2 Impact5.3 Merchandise5.4 IMAX re-release5.5 Home video6 Awards and nominations

6.1 Academy Awards
6.2 Golden Globe Awards
6.3 Hugo Awards
6.4 Saturn Awards
6.5 American Film Institute

6.1 Academy Awards6.2 Golden Globe Awards6.3 Hugo Awards6.4 Saturn Awards6.5 American Film Institute7 Further reading8 References9 External links3.1 Development3.2 Filming3.3 Visual effects and sound design5.1 Reception5.2 Impact5.3 Merchandise5.4 IMAX re-release5.5 Home video6.1 Academy Awards6.2 Golden Globe Awards6.3 Hugo Awards6.4 Saturn Awards6.5 American Film InstituteHarrison Ford stars as Indiana Jones, an archaeology professor who often embarks on perilous adventures to obtain rare artifacts. Jones claims that he has no belief in the supernatural, only to have his skepticism challenged when he discovers the Ark. Spielberg suggested casting Ford as Jones, but Lucas objected, stating that he did not want Ford to become his "Bobby De Niro" or "that guy I put in all my movies", a reference to Martin Scorsese, who often worked with Robert De Niro.[3] Desiring a lesser known actor, Lucas persuaded Spielberg to help him search for a new talent. Among the actors who auditioned were Tim Matheson, Peter Coyote, John Shea, and Tom Selleck. Selleck was originally offered the role, but he was unavailable for the part because of his commitment to the television series Magnum, P.I.[3] In June 1980, three weeks away from filming,[4] Spielberg persuaded Lucas to cast Ford after producers Marshall and Kathleen Kennedy were impressed by his performance as Han Solo in The Empire Strikes Back.[5]Karen Allen as Marion Ravenwood, a spirited, tough former lover of Indiana's. She is the daughter of Abner Ravenwood, Indiana Jones' mentor, and owns a bar in Nepal. Allen was cast after auditioning with Matheson and John Shea. Spielberg was interested in her, as he had seen her performance in National Lampoon's Animal House. Sean Young had previously auditioned for the part,[3] while Debra Winger turned it down.[6]Paul Freeman as Dr. Ren Belloq, Jones' arch nemesis, Belloq is also an archaeologist after the Ark, but he is working for the Nazis. He intends to harness the power of the Ark himself before Hitler can, but he is killed by the supernatural powers of the Ark.Ronald Lacey as Major Arnold Toht, an interrogator for the Gestapo, who tries to torture Marion Ravenwood for the headpiece of the Staff of Ra. He dies by the supernatural powers of the Ark. Lacey was cast as he reminded Spielberg of Peter Lorre.[3] Spielberg had originally offered the role to Roman Polanski, who was intrigued at the opportunity to work with Spielberg but decided to turn down the role because he wouldn't be able to make the trip to Tunisia.[7] Klaus Kinski was also offered the role, but he hated the script,[8] calling it "moronically shitty".[9]John Rhys-Davies as Sallah, "the best digger in Cairo" and has been hired by the Nazis to help them excavate Tanis. Although he fears disturbing the Ark, he is an old friend of Indiana Jones, and agrees to help him obtain it. Spielberg initially approached Danny DeVito to play Sallah, but he could not play the part due to scheduling conflicts. Spielberg cast Rhys-Davies after seeing his performance in Shogun.[3]Denholm Elliott as Dr. Marcus Brody, a museum curator, who buys the artifacts Indiana obtains for display in his museum. The U.S. government agents approach him with regard to recovering the Ark, and he sets up a meeting between them and Indiana Jones. Spielberg hired Elliott as he was a big fan of the actor.[3]Wolf Kahler as Colonel Dietrich, a ruthless Nazi officer leading the operation to secure the Ark. He is killed by the supernatural powers of the Ark.Alfred Molina, in his film debut, as Satipo, one of Jones' guides through the South American jungle. He betrays Jones and steals the golden idol, but is killed by traps before he can leave the temple.Vic Tablian as Barranca and the Monkey ManBest Visual EffectsBest Sound (Bill Varney, Steve Maslow, Gregg Landaker, Roy Charman)Best Film EditingBest Art DirectionBest Sound Effects EditingBest PictureBest Director (Steven Spielberg)Best Original ScoreBest CinematographyBest Director (Steven Spielberg)[66]Best Dramatic Presentation[67]Best Fantasy FilmBest Director (Steven Spielberg)Best Actor (Harrison Ford)Best Actress (Karen Allen)Best Writing (Lawrence Kasdan)Best Music (John Williams)Best Special Effects (Richard Edlund)Best Supporting Actor (Paul Freeman)Best Costume (Deborah Nadoolman)AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - No. 60AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills - No. 10AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Indiana Jones - No. 2 Hero

Indiana Jones - No. 2 HeroAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"Snakes! Why did it have to be snakes?" - Nominated

"Snakes! Why did it have to be snakes?" - NominatedAFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - No. 66Indiana Jones - No. 2 Hero"Snakes! Why did it have to be snakes?" - NominatedBlack, Campbell (September 1987). Raiders of the Lost Ark. Ballantine Books. ISBN0-345-35375-7.Kasdan, Lawrence (1981). Raiders of the Lost Ark: The Illustrated Screenplay. Ballantine Books. ISBN0-345-30327-X.Taylor, Derek (August 1981). The Making of Raiders of the Lost Ark. Ballantine Books. ISBN0-345-29725-3.IndianaJones.com, Lucasfilm's official Indiana Jones siteRaiders of the Lost Ark at the Internet Movie DatabaseRaiders of the Lost Ark at the TCM Movie DatabaseRaiders of the Lost Ark at AllRoviRaiders of the Lost Ark at MetacriticRaiders of the Lost Ark at Rotten TomatoesRaiders of the Lost Ark at Box Office MojoVertigo is a 1958 psychological thriller film directed by Alfred Hitchcock based on the 1954 novel D'entre les morts by Boileau-Narcejac. The screenplay was written by Alec Coppel and Samuel A. Taylor.The film stars James Stewart as former police detective John "Scottie" Ferguson, who has been forced into early retirement due to disabilities (vertigo and clinical depression) incurred in the line of duty. Scottie is hired as a private investigator to follow a woman, Madeleine Elster (Kim Novak) who is behaving peculiarly.The film was shot on location in San Francisco, California, and at Paramount Studios in Hollywood. It popularized the dolly zoom, an in-camera effect that distorts perspective to create disorientation, to convey Scottie's acrophobia. As a result of its use here, the effect is often referred to as "the Vertigo effect".The film received mixed reviews upon initial release, but has garnered acclaim since and is now often cited as a classic Hitchcock film and one of the defining works of his career. Attracting significant scholarly criticism, it replaced Citizen Kane as the best film of all time in the 2012 Sight & Sound critics' poll[2] and has appeared repeatedly in best film polls by the American Film Institute.[3] In 1996, Vertigo underwent a major restoration to create a new 70mm print and DTS soundtrack.After a rooftop chase in which his latent acrophobia results in the death of a police officer, San Francisco detective John "Scottie" Ferguson retires, spending much of his time with his ex-fiance Midge Wood (Barbara Bel Geddes). Scottie tries to gradually conquer his fear but Midge suggests another severe emotional shock may be the only cure.An acquaintance, Gavin Elster, asks Scottie to tail his wife, Madeleine, claiming she has been possessed; Scottie reluctantly agrees. The next day Scottie follows Madeleine to a florist where she secures a bouquet of flowers; next, she visits the grave of Carlotta Valdes; then she visits an art museum where she sits watching Portrait of Carlotta, a painting of a woman resembling her. Lastly, she enters the McKittrick Hotel, but when Scottie investigates, she is missing and the clerk insists she has not been there.Midge takes Scottie to a local history expert, who informs them Carlotta Valdes tragically committed suicide. Another visit with Gavin reveals Carlotta is Madeleine's great-grandmother, who Gavin fears is possessing Madeleine. Gavin also says Madeleine has no knowledge of Carlotta. Scottie tails Madeleine to Fort Point (just beneath the Golden Gate Bridge), where she suddenly leaps into San Francisco Bay. Scottie rescues Madeleine and takes her to his home. The meeting is tense and leads to a strange intimacy between them, but Madeleine quickly slips out when Scottie receives a phone call.The next day Scottie follows Madeleine to his own house, where she is hand-delivering a thank-you note to him for rescuing her, and they decide to spend the day together because Scottie fears Madeleine might attempt suicide again. The two travel to Muir Woods and then Cypress Point along 17-Mile Drive near Pebble Beach, where Madeleine, embarrassed from confessing that her dreams sound mad, runs to the ocean. Scottie chases after her and they embrace and kiss. Upon hearing the details of her nightmare, Scottie identifies the setting as Mission San Juan Bautista and takes Madeleine there, where they proclaim their love for each other. Madeleine suddenly runs into the church and up the bell tower. Scottie, halted on the steps by vertigo and paralyzing fear, watches as Madeleine plunges to her death.An inquest declares Madeleine's death a suicide, but Scottie feels ashamed that his weakness rendered him incapable of preventing someone's death. Gavin does not fault Scottie, but in the following weeks Scottie becomes depressed. While undergoing treatment in a sanatorium, he becomes mute, haunted by vivid nightmares. Although Midge visits, his condition remains unchanged. After release, Scottie haunts the places that Madeleine visited, often imagining that he sees her. One day, he spots a woman who reminds him of Madeleine, despite the woman's less elegant dress and heavier makeup. Scottie follows the woman to her hotel room, where she identifies herself as Judy Barton from Kansas. Though initially suspicious and defensive, Judy eventually agrees to join Scottie for dinner.After Scottie leaves, Judy has a flashback revealing that she was, in fact, the woman known as "Madeleine", but she is not Gavin's wife. Judy prepares to leave and writes a confession letter to Scottie explaining that she was an accomplice to the real Madeleine Elster's murder by Gavin, and how Gavin had taken advantage of Scottie's acrophobia. She rips up the letter and decides to continue the charade because of her love for Scottie.Scottie remains obsessed by his memory of "Madeleine" and their similarities. He transforms an initially unwilling Judy until she once more resembles Madeleine. Judy agrees to change on the chance that they may finally find happiness together. But Scottie realizes the truth when Judy wears a unique necklace that he remembered from the portrait of Carlotta Valdes. Instead of dinner, Scottie insists on taking Judy to the Mission San Juan Bautista.There, he reveals that he wants to re-enact the event that led to his madness, admitting that he now knows Madeleine and Judy are the same. Scottie forces her up the bell tower and angrily presses Judy to admit her deceit. Scottie reaches the top, conquering his acrophobia at last. Judy confesses that Gavin had hired her to pose as a possessed Madeleine; Gavin faked the suicide by tossing the body of his already-murdered wife from the bell tower.Judy begs Scottie to forgive her because she loves him. The two embrace when a nun, in shadow, emerges from the trapdoor; startled, Judy steps backward and falls to her death. Scottie stands on the narrow ledge while the nun rings the mission bell.The screenplay is an adaptation of the French novel The Living and the Dead (D'entre les morts) by Pierre Boileau and Thomas Narcejac. Hitchcock had previously tried to buy the rights to the same authors' previous novel, Celle qui n'tait plus, but he failed, and it was made instead by Henri-Georges Clouzot as Les Diaboliques.[4] Although Franois Truffaut once suggested that D'Entre les morts was specifically written for Hitchcock by Boileau and Narcejac,[5] Narcejac subsequently denied that this was their intention.[6] However, Hitchcock's interest in their work meant that Paramount Pictures commissioned a synopsis of D'Entre les morts in 1954, before it had even been translated into English.[7]Hitchcock originally hired playwright Maxwell Anderson to write a screenplay, but rejected his work, which was entitled Darkling, I Listen (a quotation from Keats's Ode to a Nightingale). A second version, written by Alec Coppel, again dissatisfied the director.[8] The final script was written by Samuel A. Taylor  who was recommended to Hitchcock due to his knowledge of San Francisco [7] from notes by Hitchcock. Among Taylor's creations was the character of Midge.[9] Taylor attempted to take sole credit for the screenplay, but Coppel protested to the Screen Writers Guild, which determined that both writers were entitled to a credit.[10]Vera Miles, who was under personal contract to Hitchcock and had appeared on both his television show and in his film The Wrong Man, was originally scheduled to play Madeline. She modelled for an early version of the painting which features in the film.[8] Following delays, including Hitchcock becoming ill with gallbladder problems, Miles became pregnant so had to withdraw from the role.[8] The director declined to postpone shooting and cast Kim Novak as the female lead. Ironically, by the time Novak had tied up prior film commitments and a vacation promised by Columbia Pictures, the studio that held her contract, Miles had given birth and was available for the film. Hitchcock proceeded with Novak, nevertheless. Columbia head Harry Cohn agreed to lend Novak to Vertigo if Stewart would agree to co-star with Novak in Bell, Book and Candle, a Columbia production released in December 1958.In the book, Judy's involvement in Madeleine's death was not revealed until the denoument. At the script stage, Hitchcock suggested revealing the secret two-thirds of the way through the film so that the audience would understand Judy's mental dilemma.[11] After the first preview, Hitchcock was unsure whether to keep the "letter writing scene" or not. He decided to remove it. Herbert Coleman, Vertigo's associate producer and a frequent collaborator with Hitchcock, felt the removal was a mistake. However, Hitchcock said "Release it just like that." James Stewart agreed with Hitchcock and said to Coleman: "Herbie, you shouldn't get so upset with Hitch. The picture's not that important." Hitchcock's decision was supported by Joan Harrison, another member of his circle, who felt that the film had been improved. Coleman reluctantly made the necessary edits. When he received news of this, Paramount head Barney Balaban was very vocal about the edits and ordered Hitchcock to "Put the picture back the way it was." As a result, the "letter writing scene" remained in the final film.[12]Vertigo was filmed from September to December 1957.[13] Principal photography began on location in San Francisco in September 1957 under the working title From Among the Dead.[8] In the driving scenes shot in the city, the main characters' cars are almost always pictured heading down the city's steeply inclined streets.[13]The scene in which Madeleine falls from the tower was filmed at Mission San Juan Bautista, a Spanish mission in San Juan Bautista, California. Associate producer Herbert Coleman's daughter Judy Lanini suggested the mission to Hitchcock as a filming location. A steeple, added sometime after the mission's original construction and secularization, had been demolished following a fire, so Hitchcock added a bell tower using scale models, matte paintings, and trick photography at the Paramount studio in Los Angeles.[8] The original tower was much smaller and less dramatic than the film's version. The tower's staircase was later assembled inside a studio.Following 16 days of location shooting, the production moved to Paramount's studios in Hollywood for two months of filming.[8] Hitchcock preferred to film in studios as he was able to control the environment. Once sufficient location footage had been obtained, interior sets were designed and constructed in the studio.[8]Hitchcock popularized the dolly zoom in this film, leading to the technique's sobriquet, amongst several others, "the Vertigo effect". This "dolly-out/zoom-in" method involves camera physically moving away from a subject whilst simultaneously zooming in[14] (a similar effect can be achieved in reverse), so that the subject retains its size in the frame, but the background's perspective changes.[15][16] Hitchcock used the effect to look down the tower shaft to emphasise its height and Scottie's disorientation.[17] Following difficulties filming the shot on a full-sized set, a model of the tower shaft was constructed, and the dolly zoom was filmed horizontally.[8]Hitchcock and costume designer Edith Head used color to heighten emotion.[8] Grey was chosen for Madeline's suit because it is not usually a blonde's colour, so was psychologically jarring.[8] In contrast, Novak's character wore a white coat when she visited Scottie's apartment, which Head and Hitchcock considered more natural for a blonde to wear.[8]A coda to the film was shot that showed Midge listening to a radio report describing the pursuit of Gavin Elster across Europe. When Scottie enters, she switches the radio off. They share a drink and look out of the window in silence. Contrary to reports that this scene was filmed to meet foreign censorship needs,[18] this tag ending had originally been demanded by Geoffrey Shurlock of the U.S. Production Code Administration, who had noted: "It will, of course, be most important that the indication that Elster will be brought back for trial is sufficiently emphasized." Hitchcock finally succeeded in fending off most of Shurlock's demands (which included toning down erotic allusions) and had the tag ending dropped.[7] It is included as an extra on the Laserdisc and the 2008 DVD release, but therein lies an in-joke, for the film's restorers Robert A. Harris and James C. Katz can clearly be heard as the announcers on the radio during the 90 seconds tag.[citation needed]Various internet sources state that this longer version was actually shown in British cinemas,[citation needed] where Vertigo was passed by the British Board of Film Classification with a running time of 132 minutes.[19]The score was written by Bernard Herrmann. It was not conducted by him, but was conducted by Muir Mathieson and recorded in Europe, due to a musicians' strike in the U.S.[20]In a 2004 special issue of the British Film Institute's (BFI) magazine Sight & Sound, director Martin Scorsese described the qualities of Herrmann's famous score:Hitchcock's film is about obsession, which means that it's about circling back to the same moment, again and again ... And the music is also built around spirals and circles, fulfilment and despair. Herrmann really understood what Hitchcock was going for  he wanted to penetrate to the heart of obsession.[20]The "Love Theme From Vertigo" was used for an extended sequence in the 2011 black and white silent film The Artist, which won the Academy Award for Best Picture.Graphic designer Saul Bass extracted Hitchcock's spiral motif as an image that appears during the film to convey, what the documentary Obsessed with Vertigo labels, "Vertigo's psychological vortex". The images features in the title sequence and on the poster.[8]Vertigo premiered in San Francisco on May 9, 1958 at the Stage Door Theater at Mason and Geary (now the Ruby Skye nightclub).[21] While Vertigo did actually break even upon its original release,[22][23] earning $2.8 million in gross rental in the United States alone against its $2,479,000 cost,[24] it earned significantly less than other Hitchcock productions.[25] Reviews were mixed. Variety said the film showed Hitchcock's "mastery", but was too long and slow for "what is basically only a psychological murder mystery".[26] Similarly, the Los Angeles Times admired the scenery, but found the plot "too long" and felt it "bogs down" in "a maze of detail"; scholar Dan Aulier says that this review "sounded the tone that most popular critics would take with the film".[27] However, the Los Angeles Examiner loved it, admiring the "excitement, action, romance, glamor and [the] crazy, off-beat love story".[28] As well, New York Times film critic Bosley Crowther also gave Vertigo a positive review by explaining that "[the] secret [of the film] is so clever, even though it is devilishly far-fetched."[29]Additional reasons for the mixed response initially were that Hitchcock fans were not pleased with his departure from the romantic-thriller territory of earlier films and that the mystery was solved with one-third of the film left to go.[30]In an interview with Franois Truffaut, Hitchcock stated that Vertigo was one of his favorite films, with some reservations.[31] Hitchcock blamed the film's failure on Stewart, at age 50, looking too old to play a convincing love interest for Kim Novak, who at 25 was half his age.[32]Hitchcock and Stewart received awards at the San Sebastin International Film Festival, including a Silver Seashell for Best Director (tied with Mario Monicelli for I soliti ignoti (Big Deal on Madonna Street aka Persons Unknown) and Best Actor (also tied, with Kirk Douglas in The Vikings). The film was nominated for two Academy Awards, in the technical categories[33] Best Art Direction - Black-and-White or Color (Hal Pereira, Henry Bumstead, Samuel M. Comer, Frank McKelvy) and Best Sound (George Dutton).[34]In the 1950s, the French Cahiers du cinma critics began re-evaluating Hitchcock as a serious artist rather than just a populist showman. However, even Franois Truffaut's important 1962 interviews with Hitchcock (not published in English until 1967) mentions Vertigo only in passing. Dan Aulier has suggested that the real beginning of Vertigo's rise in adulation was the British-Canadian scholar Robin Wood's Hitchcock's Films (1968), which calls the film "Hitchcock's masterpiece to date and one of the four or five most profound and beautiful films the cinema has yet given us".[35] Adding to its mystique was the fact that Vertigo was one of five films owned by Hitchcock which was removed from circulation in 1973. When Vertigo was re-released in theaters in October 1983, and then on home video in October 1984, it achieved an impressive commercial success and laudatory reviews.[36] Similarly adulatory reviews were written for the October 1996 showing of a restored print in 70mm and DTS sound at the Castro Theater in San Francisco.[37]In 1989, Vertigo was recognized as a "culturally, historically and aesthetically significant" film by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry in the first year of the registry's voting. Currently on Rotten Tomatoes it has a "certified fresh" rating of 98%.Among international film critics, the film has experienced a similar re-evaluation. Every ten years since 1952, the British Film Institute's film magazine Sight & Sound has asked the worlds leading film critics to compile a list of the 10 best films of all time. Not until 1982 did Vertigo enter the list, and then in 7th place.[38] By 1992 it had advanced to 4th place,[39] by 2002 to 2nd.[40] Vertigo was voted in first place in Sight & Sound's 2012 poll, displacing Orson Welles' Citizen Kane from the position it had occupied since 1962.[41][2] Commenting upon the 2012 results, the magazine's editor Nick James said that Vertigo was "the ultimate critics' film. It is a dream-like film about people who are not sure who they are but who are busy reconstructing themselves and each other to fit a kind of cinema ideal of the ideal soul-mate."[2]In his 2004 book Blockbuster, however, British film critic Tom Shone suggested that Vertigo's critical re-evaluation has led to excessive praise, and argued for a more measured response. Faulting Sight & Sound for "perennially" putting the film on the list of best-ever films, he wrote that "Hitchcock is a director who delights in getting his plot mechanisms buffed up to a nice humming shine, and so the Sight and Sound team praise the one film of his in which this is not the case  it's all loose ends and lopsided angles, its plumbing out on display for the critic to pick over at his leisure."[42]In 2005, Vertigo came in second (to Goodfellas) in British magazine Total Film's book 100 Greatest Movies of All Time.[43]In 2012, among a general media tendency to recognise its importance further, Vertigo replaced Citizen Kane at the top of the list of the British Film Institute's Sight and Sound magazine as the greatest film of all time, a place that Citizen Kane held for 50 years.[44]American Film Institute recognitionThe San Francisco locations have become celebrated amongst the film's fans, with organised tours across the area.[46] In March 1997, the cultural French magazine Les Inrockuptibles published a special issue titled Vertigo's about the film locations in San Francisco, Dans le dcor, which lists and describes all actual locations.[47] In October 1996, the restored print of Vertigo debuted at the Castro Theatre in San Francisco with a live on-stage introduction by Kim Novak, providing the city a chance to celebrate itself.[48]In 1996, director Harrison Engle produced a documentary about the making of Hitchcock's classic, Obsessed with Vertigo. Narrated by Roddy McDowell, the film played on American Movie Classics, and has since been included with DVD versions of Vertigo. Surviving members of the cast and crew participated, along with noted filmmaker Martin Scorsese and Alfred's daughter, Patricia Hitchcock.[8] Engle first visited the Vertigo shooting locations in the summer of 1958, just months after completion of the film.In 1996, the film was given a lengthy and controversial restoration by Robert A. Harris and James C. Katz and re-released to theaters. The new print featured restored color and newly created audio, utilizing modern sound effects mixed in DTS digital surround sound. In October 1996, the restored Vertigo premiered at the Castro Theatre in San Francisco, with Kim Novak and Patricia Hitchcock in person. At this screening, the film was exhibited for the first time in DTS and 70mm, a format with a similar frame size to the VistaVision system in which it was originally shot.When restoring the sound, Harris and Katz wanted to stay as close as possible to the original, and had access to the original music recordings that had been stored in the vaults at Paramount. However, as the project demanded a new 6-channel DTS stereo soundtrack, it was necessary to re-record some sound effects using the foley process.[8] The soundtrack was remixed at the Alfred Hitchcock Theatre at Universal Studios. Aware that the film had a considerable following, the restoration team knew that they were under particular pressue to restore the film as accurately as possible. To achieve this, they used Hitchcock's original dubbing notes for guidance of how the director wanted the film to sound in 1958.[8] Harris and Katz sometimes added extra sound effects to camouflage defects in the old soundtrack ("hisses, pops, and bangs"); in particular they added extra seagull cries and a foghorn to the scene at Cypress Point.[49] The new mix has also been accused of putting too much emphasis on the score at the expense of the sound effects.[50] The 2005 Hitchcock Masterpiece Collection DVD contains the original mono track as an option.Significant color correction was necessary because of the fading of original negatives. In some cases a new negative was created from the silver separation masters, but in many instances this was impossible because of differential separation shrinkage, and because the 1958 separations were poorly made. Separations used three individual films: one for each of the primary colors. In the case of Vertigo, these had shrunk in different and erratic proportions, making re-alignment impossible.[8] As such, significant amounts of computer assisted coloration were necessary. Although the results are not noticeable on viewing the film, some elements were as many as eight generations away from the original negative, in particular the entire "Judy's Apartment" sequence, which is perhaps the most pivotal sequence in the entire film (on a large screen this sequence appears to be a 16mm duplicate of the original).When such large portions of re-creation become necessary, then the danger of artistic license by the restorers becomes an issue, and the restorers received some criticism for their re-creation of colors that allegedly did not honor the director and cinematographer's intentions. The restoration team argued that they did research on the colors used in the original locations, cars, wardrobe, and skin tones. One breakthrough moment came when the Ford Motor Company supplied a well-preserved green paint sample for a car used in the film. As the use of the color green in the film has artistic importance, matching a shade of green was a stroke of luck for restoration and provided a reference shade from which to work.[51]High Anxiety, a 1977 film by Mel Brooks, is a parody of suspense films directed by Alfred Hitchcock, but leans on Vertigo in particular. The film was dedicated to Hitchcock, who sent Brooks a case containing six magnums of 1961 Chteau Haut-Brion wine, to show his appreciation.[52]Obsession, a 1976 film by Brian De Palma, is heavily influenced by Vertigo. Additionally, Body Double, a 1984 De Palma film, co-opts plot elements from Vertigo, as well as from Hitchcock's 1954 film Rear Window.Sledge Hammer!, the mid-1980s American satirical police TV sitcom, featured an episode called "Vertical," which mirrored plot elements and motifs of Vertigo.The Vertigo Murders, a 2000 novel by J. Madison Davis, is a detective story with Hitchcock as a character, set during the filming of Vertigo. Kim Novak and Jimmy Stewart appear as themselves within the story.To Kill For, a 2008 play by Lucy Gray, is a biographical fantasy in which Hitchcock and his wife interact with the characters from Vertigo.The Testament of Judith Barton, a 2012 novel by Wendy Powers & Robin McLeod, tells the back-story of Kim Novak's character. The novel creates a life for Judy Barton that foreshadows and motivates her involvement in the plot of the film.The video for Faith No More's song "Last Cup of Sorrow" uses Vertigo as a template, squeezing the movie's highlights into the length of a rock song, using the band as the cast of this mini remake. The video captures the look and feel of the movie, while treating some of its scenes with a great deal of humor.Harvey Danger's song Carlotta Valdez from their album Where Have All the Merrymakers Gone? summarizes the plot of the film.RestorationImagesMay 9, 1958(1958-05-09)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Filming
3.3 Alternate ending
3.4 Music and titles

3.1 Development3.2 Filming3.3 Alternate ending3.4 Music and titles4 Reception

4.1 Initial reception
4.2 Re-evaluation
4.3 Home media

4.1 Initial reception4.2 Re-evaluation4.3 Home media5 Restoration6 Derivative works7 See also8 References9 Bibliography10 External links3.1 Development3.2 Filming3.3 Alternate ending3.4 Music and titles4.1 Initial reception4.2 Re-evaluation4.3 Home mediaJames Stewart as John "Scottie" FergusonKim Novak as Judy Barton/Madeleine ElsterBarbara Bel Geddes as Midge WoodTom Helmore as Gavin ElsterFred Graham as Scottie's police partnerRaymond Bailey as Scottie's doctorHenry Jones as the CoronerEllen Corby as the hotel ownerAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #61AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills #18AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores #12AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions #18AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #9AFI's 10 Top 10 #1 Mystery[45]Vertigo effectAlfred Hitchcock filmographyCinema of the United StatesList of American films of 1958Films considered the greatest everAuiler, Dan (1999). Vertigo: The Making of a Hitchcock Classic. London: Titan Books.Auiler, Dan (2000). Vertigo: The Making of a Hitchcock Classic. Macmillan. ISBN0-312-26409-7.Block, Alex Ben; Wilson, Lucy Autrey, eds. (2010). George Lucas's Blockbusting: A Decade-By-Decade Survey of Timeless Movies Including Untold Secrets of Their Financial and Cultural Success. HarperCollins. ISBN9780061778896.Klein, Richard B. (2005). Coles, Felice Anne. ed. In memory of Richard B. Klein: essays in contemporary philology. Romance Monographs, University of Mississippi.Eliot, Marc (2006). Jimmy Stewart: a biography. Harmony Books. ISBN9781400052219.Kraft, Jeff; Leventhal, Aaron (2002). Footsteps in the Fog: Alfred Hitchcock's San Francisco. Santa Monica Press. ISBN1-891661-27-2.Jones, Dan (2002). The Dime Novel and the Master of Suspense: The Adaptation of D'Entre Les Morts Into Vertigo. Saint Paul, Minn.: University of St. Thomas.Lev, Peter (2006). Transforming the Screen, 1950-1959. Volume 7 of History of the American Cinema. University of California Press. ISBN9780520249660.Mamer, Bruce (2008). Film Production Technique: Creating the Accomplished Image (5th ed.). Cengage Learning. ISBN0495411167.McGilligan, Patrick (2003). Alfred Hitchcock: A Life in Darkness and Light. ReganBooks.Monaco, Paul (2010). A History of American Movies: A Film-By-Film Look at the Art, Craft, and Business of Cinema. Scarecrow Press. ISBN9780810874343.Parish, James Robert (2008). It's Good to Be the King: The Seriously Funny Life of Mel Brooks. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 9780470225264.Shone, Tom (2004). Blockbuster: How Hollywood Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Summer. Simon & Schuster. ISBN0-7432-6838-5.Sipos, Tomas M. (2010). Horror Film Aesthetics: Creating The Visual Language of Fear. McFarland. ISBN0786449721.Truffaut, Franois; Hitchcock, Alfred (1985). Hitchcock. New York: Simon and Schuster. OCLC273102.Vertigo at AllRoviVertigo at the Internet Movie DatabaseVertigo at Rotten TomatoesOfficial web page at Universal Studios EntertainmentA Very Different "Slice of Cake:" Restoring Alfred Hitchcock's VertigoA Swimming in the Head Detailed critique of the 1996 restorationVertigo Screenshot Gallery at Alfred Hitchcock Fans OnlineSullivan's Travels is a 1941 American comedy film written and directed by Preston Sturges. It is a satire about a movie director, played by Joel McCrea, who longs to make a socially relevant drama, but eventually learns that comedies are his more valuable contribution to society. The film features one of Veronica Lake's first leading roles. The title is a reference to Gulliver's Travels, the famous novel by satirist Jonathan Swift about another journey of self-discovery.In 1990, Sullivan's Travels was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."John L. Sullivan (Joel McCrea), a popular young Hollywood director fresh from a string of very profitable, but shallow comedies (e.g. Ants in Your Plants of 1939) , tells his studio boss, Mr. Lebrand (Robert Warwick), that he is dissatisfied and wants his next project to be a serious exploration of the plight of the downtrodden, to be based on the socially-conscious novel O Brother, Where Art Thou? by Sinclair Beckstein. Not surprisingly, Lebrand wants him to direct another, more lucrative comedy instead, but the idealistic Sullivan refuses to give in. He wants to "know trouble" first-hand as a tramp so he can return and make a film that truly depicts the sorrows of humanity. His butler (Robert Greig) and valet (Eric Blore) openly question the wisdom of his plan.Undeterred, Sullivan dresses as a penniless hobo and takes to the road. However, no matter how hard he tries, somehow he always ends up back in Hollywood. Lebrand insists that his staff follow him in a double-decker coach. Neither party is happy with the arrangement; Sullivan eventually persuades his guardians to leave him alone and arranges to rendezvous with them later. When he hitchhikes, he finds himself back where he started.Then he meets a young failed actress (Veronica Lake, credited only as "The Girl") who is contemplating quitting the business. In return for her kindness to him, Sullivan gives her a lift in his car, without telling his servants; they report the "theft" and the pair are apprehended by the police. Upon their release, the Girl pushes him into his enormous swimming pool for deceiving her about his true identity. However, after considering her options, she becomes his traveling companion.This time, Sullivan succeeds in living like a hobo. After eating in soup kitchens and sleeping in homeless shelters with the Girl, Sullivan finally decides he has had enough. His experiment is publicized by the studio as a huge success. The Girl wants to stay with him, but he explains that, on the advice of his business manager, he got married to reduce his income tax, only to discover that his wife cost him double what he saved in taxes.Sullivan decides to thank the homeless by handing out $5 bills, but one man decides he wants more than his share and ambushes Sullivan when he is alone. Sullivan is knocked unconscious and thrown onto a train boxcar leaving the city, but the thief is run over and killed by another train. The man had earlier stolen Sullivan's shoes, which had a special identification card hidden under one of the soles. When the card is found, everyone assumes the unrecognizable body is Sullivan's.Meanwhile, Sullivan wakes up in the rail yard of another city, with no memory of who he is or how he got there. In his confused state, he assaults the railroad worker who finds him, for which he is sentenced to six years in a labor camp. He eventually regains his memory, but not before learning the importance of laughter in the otherwise dreary lives of his fellow prisoners when they are allowed to attend a showing of Walt Disney's Playful Pluto cartoon. Sullivan comes to realize that comedy can do more good for the poor than O Brother, Where Art Thou?.But Sullivan still has a problem  he cannot convince anybody that he is Sullivan. Finally, he comes up with an ingenious solution: he confesses to being his own killer. When his picture makes the front page of the newspapers, the Girl recognizes him and gets him released. His "widow" had taken up with his crooked business manager in the meanwhile, so he can now divorce her and be reunited with the Girl. A montage of happily laughing faces ends the film.Cast notes:Paramount purchased Sturges's script for Sullivan's Travels for $6,000. He wrote the film [as a] response to the "preaching" he found in other comedies "which seemed to have abandoned the fun in favor of the message."[3] Sturges may have been influenced by the stories of John Garfield,[4] who lived the life of a hobo, riding freight trains and hitchhiking his way cross country for a short period in the 1930s. Sturges wrote the film with Joel McCrea in mind, but who was to play opposite him went through the casting process. Barbara Stanwyck was considered to co-star, and Frances Farmer was tested for the role as well.[3]The film as released opens with a dedication:To the memory of those who made us laugh: the motley mountebanks, the clowns, the buffoons, in all times and in all nations, whose efforts have lightened our burden a little, this picture is affectionately dedicated.This was originally intended to be spoken by Sullivan. Sturges wanted the film to begin with the prologue: "This is the story of a man who wanted to wash an elephant. The elephant darn near ruined him."[3] Paramount contracted with the Schlesinger Corp., who made the Warner Bros. Looney Tunes and Merrie Melodies cartoons, to make an animated main title sequence, but this was not used in the film, if it was ever actually produced.[3]The censors at the Hays Office had objections to the script which the studio submitted to them. They felt that the word "bum" would be rejected by British censors, and warned that there should be no "suggestion of sexual intimacy" between Sullivan and The Girl in the scenes in which they are sleeping together at the mission.[3]Sullivan's Travels went into production on 12 May 1941 and wrapped on 22 July.[5] Location shooting took place in Canoga Park, San Marino, Castaic and at Lockheed Air Terminal.[3]Veronica Lake was six months pregnant at the beginning of production, a fact she didn't tell Sturges until filming began. Sturges was so furious when he learned that, according to Lake, he had to be physically restrained.[6] Sturges consulted with Lake's doctor to see if she could perform the part, and hired former Tournament of Roses queen Cheryl Walker as Lake's double.[3] Edith Head, Hollywood's most renowned costume designer, was tasked to find ways of concealing Lake's condition. Reportedly, Lake was disliked by some of her co-stars; McCrea refused to work with her again, turning down a lead role in I Married a Witch, and Fredric March, who got the part, didn't get along with her as well.[7]There were some minor problems during filming. Sturges had wanted to use a clip from a Charlie Chaplin film for the church scene, but was turned down by Chaplin. McCrea does parody Chaplin's "Little Tramp" character earlier in the film.[3] Also, the "Poverty Montage" was scheduled to take three hours to film, but instead took seven hours. Incidents such as this may account for the film, which cost more than $689,000 to produce, going more than $86,000 over budget.[3]The film was released in December 1941, but the New York City opening was not until 28 January 1942.[8]When the film was released, the U.S. government's Office of Censorship declined to approve it for export overseas during wartime, because of the "long sequence showing life in a prison chain gang which is most objectionable because of the brutality and inhumanity with which the prisoners are treated." This conformed with the office's standing policy of not exporting films which could be used for propaganda purposes by the enemy. The producers of the film declined to make suggested changes which could have altered the film's status.[3]Sullivan's Travels was released on video in the U.S. on 16 March 1989, and re-released on 30 June 1993. The film was re-released in the U.K. with a restored print on 12 May 2000.[9]Sullivan's Travels was not as immediately successful at the box office as earlier Sturges films such as The Great McGinty and The Lady Eve, and also received a mixed critical reception. Although the review in the New York Times called the film "the most brilliant picture yet this year" and praised Sturges's mix of escapist fun with underlying significance, the Hollywood Reporter said that it lacked the "down to earth quality and sincerity which made [Sturges's] other three pictures a joy to behold" and that "Sturges...fails to heed the message that writer Sturges proves in his script. Laughter is the thing people want-not social studies." The New Yorker's review said that "anyone can make a mistake, Preston Sturges, even. The mistake in question is a pretentious number called Sullivan's Travels."[3] Nevertheless the Times named it as one of the "10 Best Films of 1941", and the National Board of Review nominated it as best picture of the year.Over time, the reputation of the film has improved tremendously, and it is now considered a classic, with at least one reviewer calling it Sturges's "masterpiece" and "one of the finest movies about movies ever made."[10]In 1990, Sullivan's Travels was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant." In 2007, the American Film Institute ranked it as the #61 Greatest Movie of All Time, the first inclusion of this film on the list. In addition, the movie's poster was ranked as #19 of "The 25 Best Movie Posters Ever" by Premiere.American Film Institute listsOn November 9, 1942, Lux Radio Theatre broadcast a radio adaptation of Sullivan's Travels with Ralph Bellamy in the lead role and Veronica Lake reprising her role.[3]The film is a satire of the conflict between art and commerce as well as the gap between the privileged and the impoverished. Sturges skewers the naivet of wealthy entertainers who want to appease their class guilt by making "socially relevant drama". Instead, he suggests that measurable good can come from anyone willing to take a road less traveled.[citation needed]The scene where the prisoners are taken to watch a cartoon takes place in a Southern African-American church; the film notably treats the African-American characters there with a level of respect unusual in films of the period. The Secretary of the NAACP, Walter White, wrote to Sturges:I want to congratulate and thank you for the church sequence in Sullivan's Travels. This is one of the most moving scenes I have seen in a moving picture for a long time. But I am particularly grateful to you, as are a number of my friends, both white and colored, for the dignified and decent treatment of Negroes in this scene. I was in Hollywood recently and am to return there soon for conferences with production heads, writers, directors, and actors and actresses in an effort to induce broader and more decent picturization of the Negro instead of limiting him to menial or comic roles. The sequence in Sullivan's Travels is a step in that direction and I want you to know how grateful we are.[3]In the airplane scene in Sullivan's Travels, the author of the book O Brother, Where Art Thou? is shown to be "Sinclair Beckstein", which is an amalgamation of the names of authors Upton Sinclair, Sinclair Lewis, and John Steinbeck, all of whom wrote socially conscious fiction.[13] The title of Sullivan's unrealized dream project has resurfaced in several other works.December 1941(1941-12)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Response5 Awards and honors6 Adaptations7 Themes8 In popular culture9 References10 External linksJoel McCrea as John L. SullivanVeronica Lake as The GirlRobert Warwick as Mr. LebrandWilliam Demarest as Mr. JonasFranklin Pangborn as Mr. CasalsisPorter Hall as Mr. HadrianByron Foulger as Mr. Johnny ValdelleMargaret Hayes as SecretaryRobert Greig as Burrows, Sullivan's butlerEric Blore as Sullivan's valetTorben Meyer as The doctorGeorges Renavent as Old trampThis was the sixth of ten films written by Preston Sturges that William Demarest appeared in.[2]Members of Sturges's unofficial "stock company" of character actors who appear in Sullivan's Travels include George Anderson, Al Bridge, Chester Conklin, Jimmy Conlin, William Demarest, Robert Dudley, Byron Foulger, Robert Greig, Harry Hayden, Esther Howard, Arthur Hoyt, J. Farrell MacDonald, Torben Meyer, Charles R. Moore, Frank Moran, Jack Norton, Franklin Pangborn, Emory Parnell, Victor Potel, Dewey Robinson, Harry Rosenthal, Julius Tannen and Robert Warwick. Eric Blore had appeared in The Lady Eve and Porter Hall would go on to appear in three other Sturges films: The Great Moment, The Miracle of Morgan's Creek and The Beautiful Blonde from Bashful Bend, Sturges's last American film.Preston Sturges has a cameo appearance as the film director in the scene set in a film studio where The Girl sees Sullivan's picture in the paper and recognizes him. The man she almost runs into on the street outside the studio is Ray Milland.[3]Another member of the production staff appeared in the film as well: associate producer Paul Jones appeared as "Dear Joseph", the late husband of "Miz Zeffie", in a photograph in which the man's expression changes.[3]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  Nominated[11]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs  #39AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"There's a lot to be said for making people laugh. Did you know that's all some people have? It isn't much, but it's better than nothing in this cockeyed caravan. Boy!"  Nominated[12]

"There's a lot to be said for making people laugh. Did you know that's all some people have? It isn't much, but it's better than nothing in this cockeyed caravan. Boy!"  Nominated[12]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers  #25AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #61"There's a lot to be said for making people laugh. Did you know that's all some people have? It isn't much, but it's better than nothing in this cockeyed caravan. Boy!"  Nominated[12]In Lawrence Kasdan's Grand Canyon (1991), Steve Martin's character, an action movie producer who experiences a revelation after being mugged, temporarily decides to make high-quality "life drama" movies, but soon returns to the action genre when he decides that violence is life and should be welcomed and watched. Martin's character recommends that his friend (played by Kevin Kline) check out Sullivan's Travels, as "movies are where we get our answers to life".A 1995 episode of Due South titled "Witness" has this film being shown in a prison where Fraser has had himself incarcerated in order to protect both his partner Ray and the husband of a witness in a murder trial, both also incarcerated at the prison.In the television show Numb3rs, season 4, episode 16, "Atomic No. 33" (May 2, 2008), Special Agent Don Eppes reveals that his favorite film is not Heat but rather Sullivan's Travels. Numb3rs Season 6, episode 4, "Where Credit's Due" (Oct 16, 2009), quotes a character from the movie.In the HBO series Sex and the City, season 1, episode 2, Models and Mortals, Miranda's date comments that he would like to sleep with Lake around the time she filmed this movie.A 1991 episode of The Simpsons, "Oh Brother, Where Art Thou?", got its title from the film[14] and features Homer's half-brother Herb, who goes from CEO of a major car manufacturer to a hobo.In the 1993 film Amos & Andrew, Samuel L. Jackson's character has won the Pulitzer Prize for a play called Yo Brother, Where Art Thou?A 1998 episode of Sliders titled "Oh Brother, Where Art Thou?" features main character Quinn Mallory finding his brother in a simplistic reality reminiscent of early colonial times.The Coen brothers' 2000 film O Brother, Where Art Thou? borrows the title and has many plot similarities to Sullivan's Travels; on the special-edition DVD the Coens say the film is almost what Sullivan would have ended up making after Sullivan's Travels ends.Sullivan's Travels at the Internet Movie DatabaseSullivan's Travels at the TCM Movie DatabaseSullivan's Travels at AllRoviCriterion Collection essay by Todd McCarthyReview by Bosley Crowther in New York Times (1942)Tootsie is a 1982 American comedy film that tells the story of a talented but volatile actor whose reputation for being difficult forces him to adopt a new identity as a woman to land a job. The movie stars Dustin Hoffman, with a supporting cast that includes Jessica Lange, Teri Garr, Dabney Coleman, Charles Durning, Geena Davis, Bill Murray, and producer/director Sydney Pollack. Tootsie was adapted by Larry Gelbart, Barry Levinson (uncredited), Elaine May (uncredited) and Murray Schisgal from the story by Gelbart.In 1998 the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry. The theme song to the film, "It Might Be You"sung by singer-songwriter Stephen Bishop, and composed by Dave Grusin and Marilyn and Alan Bergmanwas a Top 40 hit in the U.S., and also hit No. 1 on the U.S. adult contemporary chart.Jessica Lange won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance as Julie Nichols. The movie earned a total of ten Academy Awards nominations and in 2000 the American Film Institute ranked Tootsie as the second funniest film of all time.[2][3]Michael Dorsey (Dustin Hoffman) is a respected but perfectionist actor. Nobody in New York wants to hire him anymore because it is difficult to work with him. According to his long-suffering agent George Fields (Sydney Pollack), Michael's attention to detail and difficult reputation got him fired from playing a tomato in a television commercial, because the idea of a tomato sitting down was "illogical" to him. After many months without a job, Michael hears of an opening on the soap opera Southwest General from his friend and acting student Sandy Lester (Teri Garr), who tries out for the role of hospital administrator but doesn't get it. In desperation, he dresses as a woman, auditions as "Dorothy Michaels" and wins the part. Michael takes the job as a way to raise $8,000 to produce a play written by his roommate Jeff Slater (Bill Murray), entitled Return To Love Canal. Michael plays his character as a feisty, feminist administrator, which surprises the other actors and crew who expected her to be another swooning female in the plot. Over time, however, his character becomes a television sensation.When Sandy catches Michael in her bedroom half undressed (he wanted to try on her clothes in order to get more ideas for Dorothy's outfits), he covers up by professing he wants to have sex with her. They have sex despite his better judgment about her self-esteem issues. Michael believes Sandy is too emotionally fragile to handle the truth about him winning the part of Dorothy, especially after noticing her strong resentment of Dorothy getting the part. Their relationship, combined with his deception, complicates his now busy schedule. Exacerbating matters further, he is strongly attracted to one of his co-stars, lovely, soft-spoken Julie Nichols (Jessica Lange), a single mother in an unhealthy relationship with the show's amoral, sexist director, Ron Carlisle (Dabney Coleman). At a party, when Michael (as himself) approaches Julie with a line that she had previously told Dorothy to which she would be receptive, she throws a drink in his face. Later, as Dorothy, when he makes tentative advances, Julie is shocked and later tells Dorothy that she likes "her," but not in a romantic way.Meanwhile, Dorothy has her own admirers to contend with: older cast member John Van Horn (George Gaynes) and Julie's widowed father Les (Charles Durning). John follows Dorothy home and almost forces himself on her, stopped only by Jeff walking in on them. Les even proposes marriage. Jeff and George are in on the masquerade and watch in amazement as the situation escalates out of control. The tipping point comes when, due to Dorothy's popularity, the show's producers want to extend her contract for another year. Michael finds a clever way to extricate himself. When the cast is forced to perform the show live, he improvises a grand speech on camera, pulls off his wig and reveals that he is actually the character's twin brother who took her place to avenge her. Sandy, Les and Jeff, who are all watching at home, have varying reactions of shock, the exception being Jeff, who simply remarks, "That... is one nutty hospital." The revelation allows everybody a more-or-less graceful way out. Julie, however, is so outraged that she slugs him in the stomach off-camera. Some weeks later, Michael awkwardly makes peace with Les in a bar, and Les shows tentative support for Michael's attraction to Julie. Later, Michael waits for Julie outside the studio. Julie resists talking but finally admits she misses Dorothy. When he confesses that "I was a better man with you as a woman than I ever was with a woman as a man", she forgives him and they walk off, Julie asking him to lend her a dress.The film was nominated for ten Academy Awards; Lange was the only winner, for Best Actress in a Supporting Role.[4]The nominations were:In the 1970s, fashion company executive Charles Evans decided to get into movie-making. It was an industry which his brother, Robert Evans, was successful in as an actor, producer, and studio executive. Evans told the Los Angeles Times in 1995 that he got into producing "because I enjoy movies very much. I have the time to do it. And I believe if done wisely, it can be a profitable business."[5] His first foray into film production was a massive success. Playwright Don McGuire had written a play in the early 1970s about an unemployed male actor who cross-dresses in order to get jobs. Titled Would I Lie to You?, the play was shopped around Hollywood for several years until it came to the attention of comedian and actor Buddy Hackett in 1978. Hackett, interested in playing the role of the talent agent, showed the script to Evans. Evans purchased an option on the play. (Delays in the film's production forced Evans to renew the option once or twice.)[6] During 1979, Evans co-wrote a screenplay based on the film with director Dick Richards and screenwriter Bob Kaufman.[7] A few months into the writing process, Richards showed it to actor Dustin Hoffman. Hoffman and Richards were partners in a company which bought and developed properties for development into films. Hoffman wanted complete creative control, and Evans agreed to remove himself from screenwriting tasks. Instead, Evans became a producer on the film, which was renamed Tootsie.[6]The idea of having director Sydney Pollack playing Hoffman's agent, George Fields, was Hoffman's. Originally the role was written for and to be played by Dabney Coleman. Pollack initially resisted the idea, but Hoffman eventually convinced him to take the role. Afterwards, Pollack still wanted to keep Coleman on board, and recast him, as the sexist, arrogant soap opera director Ron Carlisle.[8]To prepare for his role, Hoffman watched the film La Cage aux Folles several times.[9]Scenes set in the New York City Russian Tea Room were filmed in the actual restaurant.[citation needed]Roger Ebert praised the film, giving it 4 out of 4 stars and observing that:"Tootsie" is the kind of Movie with a capital M that they used to make in the 1940s, when they weren't afraid to mix up absurdity with seriousness, social comment with farce, and a little heartfelt tenderness right in there with the laughs. This movie gets you coming and going...The movie also manages to make some lighthearted but well-aimed observations about sexism. It also pokes satirical fun at soap operas, New York show business agents and the Manhattan social pecking order.[10]Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an 88% "Certified Fresh" rating.[11]Its opening weekend gross in the United States was $5,540,470.[1] Its final gross in the United States was $177,200,000,[1] making it the second highest grossing movie of 1982 after E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial. As of 2012, it remains one of the highest grossing comedy films.[citation needed]In 2011, ABC aired a primetime special, Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time, that counted down the best movies chosen by fans based on results of a poll conducted by both ABC and People. Tootsie was selected as the No. 5 Best Comedy.[citation needed]The film was first released on CED Videodisc in 1983, on VHS by RCA/Columbia Pictures Home Video in 1985 and on DVD in 2001. These releases were distributed by Columbia Pictures Home Entertainment. A special 25th Anniversary edition DVD, released by Sony Pictures, arrived in 2008.December 17, 1982(1982-12-17)1 Plot2 Cast3 Academy Awards4 Production5 Reception6 Video releases7 See also8 References9 Bibliography10 External linksDustin Hoffman as Michael Dorsey / Dorothy MichaelsJessica Lange as Julie NicholsTeri Garr as Sandy LesterDabney Coleman as Ron CarlisleCharles Durning as Leslie "Les" NicholsBill Murray as Jeff SlaterSydney Pollack as George FieldsGeorge Gaynes as John Van HornGeena Davis as April PageDoris Belack as Rita MarshallLynne Thigpen as JoEstelle Getty as Middle Aged WomanBest Picture: Sydney Pollack and Dick RichardsBest Actor in a Leading Role: Dustin HoffmanBest Actress in a Supporting Role: Teri GarrBest Director: Sydney PollackBest Original Screenplay: Larry Gelbart, Murray Schisgal and Don McGuireBest Original Song ("It Might Be You"): Dave Grusin (music), Alan Bergman (lyrics) and Marilyn Bergman (lyrics)Best Sound: Arthur Piantadosi, Les Fresholtz, Dick Alexander and Les LazarowitzBest Cinematography: Owen RoizmanBest Film Editing: Fredric Steinkamp and William SteinkampCross-dressing in film and televisionList of highest-grossing films in Canada and the United StatesCook, Philip S.; Gomery, Douglas; and Lichty, Lawrence Wilson. American Media: The Wilson Quarterly Reader. Washington, D.C.: Wilson Center Press, 1989.Thompson, Kristin. Storytelling in the New Hollywood: Understanding Classical Narrative Technique. 2d ed. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2001.Tootsie at the Internet Movie DatabaseTootsie at the TCM Movie DatabaseTootsie at Box Office MojoTootsie at Rotten TomatoesThe 25th Anniversary Tootsie by Billy MernitStagecoach is a 1939 American Western film directed by John Ford, starring Claire Trevor and John Wayne in his break-through role. The screenplay, written by Dudley Nichols and Ben Hecht, is an adaptation of "The Stage to Lordsburg", a 1937 short story by Ernest Haycox. The film follows a group of strangers riding on a stagecoach through dangerous Apache territory.Although Ford had made many Westerns in the silent film era, he had never previously directed a sound Western. Between 1929 and 1939, he directed films in almost every other genre, including Wee Willie Winkie (1937), starring Shirley Temple.[2] Stagecoach was the first of many Westerns that Ford shot using Monument Valley, in the American south-west on the ArizonaUtah border, as a location, many of which also starred John Wayne. In Stagecoach the director skilfully blended shots of Monument Valley with shots filmed at Iverson Movie Ranch in Chatsworth, California, and other locations.In 1880, a motley group of strangers boards the east-bound stagecoach from Tonto, Arizona Territory to Lordsburg, New Mexico Territory. Among them are Dallas (Claire Trevor), a prostitute who is being driven out of town by the members of the "Law and Order League"; an alcoholic doctor, Doc Boone (Thomas Mitchell); pregnant Lucy Mallory (Louise Platt), who is traveling to see her cavalry officer husband; and whiskey salesman Samuel Peacock (Donald Meek).When the stage driver, Buck (Andy Devine), looks for his normal shotgun guard, Marshal Curly Wilcox (George Bancroft) tells him that the guard has gone searching for fugitive the Ringo Kid (John Wayne). Buck tells Marshal Wilcox that Luke Plummer (Tom Tyler) is in Lordsburg. Knowing that Kid has vowed to avenge the deaths of his father and brother at Plummer's hands, the marshal decides to ride along as guard.As they set out, U.S. cavalry Lieutenant Blanchard (Tim Holt) informs the group that Geronimo and his Apaches are on the warpath and his small troop will provide an escort until they reach Dry Fork. Gambler and Southern gentleman Hatfield (John Carradine) joins them and at the edge of town, the stage is flagged down by banker Henry Gatewood, (Berton Churchill), who is absconding with $50,000 embezzled from his bank.Along the way, they come across the Ringo Kid, whose horse became lame and left him afoot. Even though they are friends, Curly has no choice but to take Ringo into custody. As the trip progresses, Ringo takes a strong liking to Dallas.When Doc Boone tells Peacock that he served as a doctor in the Union Army during the "War of the Rebellion," Hatfield quickly uses a Southern term, the "War for Southern Independence." Later, Mrs. Mallory asks Hatfield whether he was ever in Virginia; he tells her he served in the Confederate Army under her father's command.When the stage reaches Dry Fork, the group is informed that the expected cavalry detachment has gone to Apache Wells. Buck wants to turn back, but Curly demands that the group vote. With only Buck and Peacock objecting, they proceed to Apache Wells. There, Mrs. Mallory faints and goes into labor when she hears that her husband had been wounded in battle. Doc Boone is called upon to assist the delivery, and later Dallas emerges holding a healthy baby. Later that night, Ringo asks Dallas to marry him. She does not give him an immediate answer, afraid to reveal her checkered past, but the next morning, she agrees if he promises to give up his plan to fight the Plummers. Encouraged by Dallas, Ringo escapes but returns when he sees signs of a possible Indian attack.When the stage reaches Lee's Ferry, the passengers find the station and ferry burned, and those who were not killed have fled. They tie large logs to the sides of the stagecoach and float it across the river. Just when they think that danger has passed, they are set upon by a band of Apaches. Curly releases Ringo from his handcuffs to help repel the attack. During a long chase, when things look bleak, Hatfield is about to use his last bullet to save Mrs. Mallory from being taken alive when he is fatally wounded. Just then, the 6th U.S. cavalry arrives to the rescue of the group.When the stage finally arrives in Lordsburg, Gatewood is arrested by the local sheriff, and Mrs. Mallory is told that her husband's wound is not serious. Dallas begs Ringo not to seek vengeance against the Plummers, but he is determined to settle matters. Curly grants him leave and his gun. In the ensuing shootout, Ringo dispatches Luke and his two brothers, then returns to Curly, expecting to return to jail. He asks the lawman to take Dallas to his ranch. However, when Ringo boards a wagon and says goodbye, Curly invites Dallas to ride to the edge of town. As she climbs aboard, and Curly and Doc laugh and start the horses moving, letting Ringo "escape" with Dallas.The screenplay is an adaptation by Dudley Nichols of "The Stage to Lordsburg," a short story by Ernest Haycox. The rights to "Lordsburg" were bought by John Ford soon after it was published in Collier's magazine on 10 April 1937.[3] According to Thomas Schatz, Ford claimed that his inspiration in expanding Stagecoach beyond the barebones plot given in "The Stage to Lordsburg" was his familiarity with another short story, "Boule de Suif" by Guy de Maupassant.[4] Schatz believes "this scarcely holds up to scrutiny"[5] and argues that a more likely inspiration was Bret Harte's 1892 short story "The Outcasts of Poker Flat."Ford's statement also seems to be the basis for the claim that Haycox himself relied upon Guy de Maupassant's story. However, there appears to be no concrete evidence for Haycox actually being familiar with the earlier story, especially as he was documented as going out of his way to avoid reading the work of others that might unconsciously influence his writing, and he focused his personal reading in the area of history.[3]Although they were close friends, Ford declined to use Wayne in any of his projects during the 1930s, telling him to wait until he was "ready" as an actor. In 1938, Ford gave Wayne a copy of the film's script by Nichols with a request to recommend an actor to play the Ringo Kid. After reading it, Wayne suggested Lloyd Nolan for the part, but Ford was non-committal to the idea. The next day however, Ford announced to Wayne that he wanted him to play the role. The offer left Wayne feeling as if he had been "hit in the belly with a baseball bat" ... and fearing that Ford would change his mind and hire Nolan instead.Before production, John Ford shopped the project around to several Hollywood studios, all of which turned him down because big budget Westerns were out of vogue, and because Ford insisted on using John Wayne in a key role in the film. Wayne previously appeared in only one big-budget western, The Big Trail (1930, directed by Raoul Walsh), which was a huge box office flop. Between 19301939, by Wayne's own estimate, he appeared in about eighty "Poverty Row" westerns. Independent producer David O. Selznick finally agreed to produce the film, but was frustrated by Ford's indecision about when shooting would begin, and his own doubts over the casting. Ford withdrew the film from Selznick's company and approached independent producer Walter Wanger about the project. Wanger had the same reservations about producing an "A" western and even more about one starring John Wayne. Ford had not directed a western since the silent days, the most notable of which had been The Iron Horse (1924).[2] Wanger said he would not risk his money unless Ford replaced John Wayne with Gary Cooper and brought in Marlene Dietrich to play Dallas.[6]Ford refused to budge; it would be Wayne or no one. Eventually they compromised, with Wanger putting up $250,000, a little more than half of what Ford had been seeking, and Ford would give top billing to Claire Trevor, a more well-known name than John Wayne in 1939.[7]Stagecoach has been lauded as one of the most influential films ever made. Orson Welles argued that it was a perfect textbook of film making and claimed to have watched it more than 40 times during the making of Citizen Kane.[8]The film made a profit of $297,690.[1]The film was originally released through United Artists, but under the terms of its seven-year-rights rule, the company surrendered distribution rights to producer Walter Wanger in 1946. Many independent companies were responsible for this film in the years since. The film's copyright (originally by Walter Wanger Productions) was renewed by 20th Century Fox, who produced a later 1966 remake of Stagecoach. The copyright has since been reassigned to Wanger Productions through his family under the Caidin Trust/Caidin Film Company, the ancillary rights holder. However, distribution rights are now held by the UCLA Film and Television Archive on behalf of Caidin, represented by Westchester Films (which acquired the Caidin Film holdings after the folding of former distributor Castle Hill Productions). Warner Bros. Pictures handles sales and additional distribution.The original negatives of Stagecoach were either lost or destroyed. John Wayne had one positive print that had never been through a projector gate. In 1970, he permitted it to be used to produce a new negative, and that is the film seen today at film festivals.[12] UCLA fully restored the film in 1996 from surviving elements and premiered it on cable's American Movie Classics network. The previous DVD releases by Warner Home Video did not contain the restored print, but rather a video print held in the Castle Hill/Caidin Trust library. A digitally restored Blu-ray/DVD version was released in May 2010 via The Criterion Collection.Streaming audioDudley NicholsBen HechtClaire TrevorJohn WayneThomas MitchellJohn CarradineAndy DevineGeorge BancroftOtho LoveringDorothy SpencerWalter ReynoldsFebruary 15, 1939(1939-02-15)1 Plot2 Cast3 Origins4 Pre-production5 Reception6 Awards and honors

6.1 Wins
6.2 Nominations
6.3 Others

6.1 Wins6.2 Nominations6.3 Others7 Re-releases and restoration8 Remakes9 See also10 References11 External links6.1 Wins6.2 Nominations6.3 OthersClaire Trevor as DallasJohn Wayne as The Ringo KidAndy Devine as BuckJohn Carradine as HatfieldThomas Mitchell as Doc BooneLouise Platt as Lucy MalloryGeorge Bancroft as Marshal Curly WilcoxDonald Meek as Samuel PeacockBerton Churchill as Henry GatewoodTim Holt as Lieutenant BlanchardTom Tyler as Luke PlummerYakima Canutt as Cavalry scout, uncredited stunt coordinator and second unit directorChris-Pin Martin as ChrisChief White Horse as GeronimoAcademy Award for Best Supporting Actor - Thomas MitchellAcademy Award for Best Music, Scoring - Richard Hageman, W. Franke Harling, John Leipold, Leo ShukenNew York Film Critics Circle Awards for Best Director - John FordAcademy Award for Best PictureAcademy Award for Directing - John FordAcademy Award for Best Art Direction - Alexander ToluboffAcademy Award for Best Cinematography-Black-and-White - Bert GlennonAcademy Award for Film Editing - Otho Lovering, Dorothy SpencerJohn Ford won the 1939 New York Film Critics Award as Best Director. Other critics gave the film uniformly glowing reviews.[9]In 1995, this film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in their National Film Registry.In June 2008, the American Film Institute revealed its "Ten Top Ten"the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genresafter polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. Stagecoach was acknowledged as the ninth best film in the western genre.[10][11]The May 4, 1946 radio episode of Academy Award Theater had Claire Trevor reprise her role alongside Randolph Scott.The January 9, 1949 radio episode of Screen Directors Playhouse had John Wayne and Claire Trevor both reprise their parts.The 1966 remake of Stagecoach starred (in alphabetical order) Ann-Margret, Red Buttons, Mike Connors, Alex Cord, Bing Crosby, Robert Cummings, Van Heflin, Slim Pickens, and Stefanie Powers.A 1986 television version featured Willie Nelson, Kris Kristofferson, Johnny Cash, and Waylon Jennings.John Wayne filmographyStagecoach at the Internet Movie DatabaseStagecoach at Rotten TomatoesStagecoach at AllRoviStagecoach at the TCM Movie DatabaseReview of Stagecoach at TVGuide.comStage to Lordsburg by Ernest HaycoxLiterature on StagecoachStagecoach: Taking the Stage, an essay by David Cairns for The Criterion CollectionMovie Locations used in Stagecoach (1939)Stagecoach Stills and Cast LettersStagecoach on Academy Award Theater: May 4, 1946Stagecoach on Screen Directors Playhouse: January 9, 1949Cabaret is a 1972 musical film directed by Bob Fosse and starring Liza Minnelli, Michael York and Joel Grey.[2] The film is set in Berlin during the Weimar Republic in 1931, under the ominous presence of the growing National Socialist Party.The film is loosely based on the 1966 Broadway musical Cabaret by Kander and Ebb, which was adapted from the 1945 book The Berlin Stories by Christopher Isherwood and the 1951 play I Am a Camera which was derived from the same book. Only a few numbers from the stage score were used for the film; Kander and Ebb wrote new ones to replace those that were discarded. In the traditional manner of musical theater, every significant character in the stage version of Cabaret sings to express emotion and advance the plot; but in the film version, the musical numbers are entirely diegetic, and only two of the film's major characters (The Emcee and Sally) sing any songs.In 1931 Berlin, American artist Sally Bowles (Liza Minnelli) performs at the Kit Kat Klub. A new arrival in the city, Brian Roberts (Michael York), moves into Sally's boarding house. A reserved English academic and writer, Brian gives English lessons to earn a living while completing his doctorate in Philosophy. Sally unsuccessfully tries to seduce Brian and suspects he may be gay. Brian tells Sally that on three previous occasions he has tried to have physical relationships with women, all of which have failed. The unlikely pair become friends, and Brian is witness to Sally's anarchic, bohemian life in the last days of the German Weimar Republic. Later in the film, Sally and Brian become lovers despite their earlier reservations, and Brian and Sally conclude with irony that his previous failures with women were because they were "the wrong three girls."Sally befriends Maximilian von Heune (Helmut Griem), a rich playboy baron who takes her and Brian to his country estate. It becomes ambiguous which of the duo Max is seducing, epitomized by a scene in which the three dance intimately together in a wine-induced reverie. After a sexual experience with Brian, Max loses interest in the two, and departs for Argentina. When Sally triumphantly tells Brian that she slept with Max, Brian begins to laugh and reveals that he slept with Max as well. After the ensuing argument, Brian storms off and picks a fight with a group of Nazis, who beat him senseless. Brian and Sally make up in their rooming house, where Sally reveals that Max left them an envelope of money.Later on, Sally finds out that she's pregnant and is unsure whether Brian or Max is the father. Brian offers to marry her and take her back to his university life in Cambridge. After a scene that strongly hints Sally prefers the life of a singer to the life of a mother and housewife, she proceeds with an abortion. When Brian confronts her, she shares her fears and the two reach an understanding. The film ends with Brian departing for England by train, and Sally continuing her life in Berlin, singing "Cabaret" to a highly appreciative audience.A subplot concerns Fritz Wendel (Fritz Wepper), a German Jew passing as a Christian. Fritz eventually reveals his true religious background when he falls for Natalia Landauer (Marisa Berenson), a wealthy German Jewish heiress. Although they marry, the audience are left wondering what their fate will be.The Nazis' violent rise is a powerful, ever-present undercurrent in the film. Though explicit evidence of their actions is only sporadically presented, their progress can be tracked through the characters' changing actions and attitudes. While in the beginning of the film National Socialist members are sometimes harassed and even kicked out of the Kit Kat Klub, a scene midway through the film shows everyday Germans rising in song to rally around National Socialism, and the final shot of the film shows the cabaret's audience is dominated by Nazi party members.While he does not play a role in the main plot or subplot, the "Emcee" (Joel Grey) serves in the role of storyteller throughout the film, acting as a sort of voyeur in the circus atmosphere. His surface demeanor is one of benevolence and hospitality ("Willkommen"), but when the floor show gets underway, he exposes the audience to the seedy world of the Cabaret. His intermittent songs in the Kit Kat Klub are risque and pointedly mock the Nazis. In a scene when Sally experiences delirium, the Emcee is seen holding her breasts - the significance of this is never explained, and it is not clear if it is memory or fantasy.The rise of the National Socialist movement and their increasing influence on German society is dramatically demonstrated in the beer garden scene: A boy  only his face seen  sings to the seated guests what first seems an innocent lyrical song about the beauties of nature. This gradually becomes the strident "Tomorrow Belongs to Me" as the camera shifts to show that the boy is wearing a brown Hitler Youth uniform and lifts his hand in the Nazi salute. One by one, nearly all guests in the beer garden get up and voluntarily join in the singing and saluting. The oldest gentleman among them, however, obviously feels differently, and does not share the common exaltation; he obviously has grown wise enough not to join the chorus and turns away uneasily. Max and Brian flee the beer garden after the show of grass roots solidarity, realising that the Nazis will be difficult to "control" now. Earlier in the film the NSDAP enjoyed relative favor with the main characters, due to their strong opposition to Communism, which was a natural risk to the trio's increasingly lavish lifestyle.Although the songs throughout the film allude to and advance the narrative, every song except "Tomorrow Belongs to Me" is executed in the context of a Kit Kat Klub performance. The voice heard on the radio reading the news throughout the film in German was that of associate producer Harold Nebenzal, whose father Seymour Nebenzahl made such notable Weimar films such as M (1931), Testament of Dr. Mabuse (1933), and Threepenny Opera (1931).In 1971, Bob Fosse learned through Harold Prince, director of the original Broadway production, that Cy Feuer was producing a film adaptation of Cabaret through ABC Pictures and Allied Artists. Determined to direct the film, Fosse urged Feuer to hire him. Chief executives Manny Wolf and Marty Baum preferred a bigger name director such as Joseph Mankiewicz or Gene Kelly. Furthermore, Fosses many difficulties in directing the highly unsuccessful film adaptation of Sweet Charity gave Wolf and Baum serious concerns. Feuer appealed to the studio heads, citing Fosses talent for staging and shooting musical numbers, adding that if inordinate attention was given to filming the book scenes at the expense of the musical numbers, the whole film could fail. Fosse was ultimately hired.Over the next months, Fosse met with previously hired writer Jay Presson Allen to discuss the screenplay. Originally unsatisfied with Allens script, he hired Hugh Wheeler to rewrite and revise Allens work. To this day, Wheeler is referred to as merely a "research consultant" while Allen retains screenwriting credit. The final script was based less on Joe Masteroffs original book of the stage version and more on The Berlin Stories and I Am a Camera.Fosse and Feuer traveled to Germany, where producers chose to shoot the film, in order to finish assembling the film crew. During this time, Fosse highly recommended Robert Surtees for cinematographer, but Feuer and the top executives saw Surtees work on Sweet Charity as one of the films many artistic problems. Producers eventually chose British cinematographer Geoffrey Unsworth. Designers Rolf Zehetbauer, Hans Jrgen Kiebach and Herbert Strabel served as production designers. Charlotte Flemming designed costumes. Fosse dancer Kathy Doby and John Sharpe were brought on as Fosses dance aides.Feuer had cast Liza Minnelli as Sally Bowles (a role previously denied her in the stage version) and Joel Grey (reprising his stage role) long before Fosse was attached to the project, Fosse was given the option of using Grey as Emcee or walk away from the production. Fosse hired Michael York as Sally Bowles openly bisexual love interest. Several smaller roles, as well as the dancers in the film, were eventually cast in Germany.Rehearsals and filming took place entirely in Germany. For reasons of economy, indoor scenes were shot at Bavaria Film Studios in Grnwald, outside Munich. Location shooting took place in and around Munich and Berlin, and in Schleswig-Holstein and Saxony. Editing was done in Los Angeles before the eventual theatrical release in February 1972.The film is significantly different from the Broadway musical. To accommodate Minnelli, Sally Bowles is Americanized. The character of Cliff Bradshaw was renamed Brian Roberts and made British, though he still remained bisexual. The characters, and plot lines involving, Fritz, Natalia and Max do not exist in the play (although there is a minor character named Max in the stage version, the owner of the Kit Kat Club, who bears no relation to the character in the film). The Broadway version used special settings to separate the fantasy world of the Cabaret from the darker rest of the world. While in the stage version (along with Isherwood's original story), Sally is a terrible singer, who thinks she's better than she actually is (preventing her from becoming the actress she wants to be and keeping her trapped at the Kit Kat Club), in the film she is portrayed as a skilled singer.Fosse cut several of the songs, leaving only those that are sung within the confines of the Kit Kat Klub, and "Tomorrow Belongs to Me" - sung in a beer garden, though in the stage play it is sung first by the cabaret boys and then at a private party. Kander and Ebb wrote several new songs for the movie and removed others; "Don't Tell Mama" was replaced by "Mein Herr," and "The Money Song" (retained in an instrumental version as "Sitting Pretty") was replaced by "Money, Money." Interestingly, "Mein Herr" and "Money, Money," which were composed for the film version, have, due to their popularity, now been added to performances of the stage musical alongside the original numbers. The song "Maybe This Time," which Sally performs at the cabaret, was not written for the film. Kander and Ebb had written it years earlier for Kaye Ballard, thus making it ineligible for an Academy Award nomination. Though "Don't Tell Mama" and "Married" were removed as performed musical numbers, both appeared in the film. The former's bridge section appears as instrumental music played on Sally's gramophone; the latter is initially played on the piano in Fraulein Schneider's parlor and later heard on Sally's gramophone in a German translation ("Heiraten") sung by cabaret singer Greta Keller.Several characters were cut from the film (including Herr Schultz, with Fraulein Schneider's part greatly reduced and the whole romantic subplot removed) and several from Isherwood's original stories put back in. The entire score was re-orchestrated, with all the numbers being accompanied by the stage band.The following songs from the original Broadway production are missing in the film version, but are still available on the Original Broadway Cast album:The film currently holds a 97% "Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with the consensus "Great performances and evocative musical numbers help Cabaret secure its status as a stylish, socially conscious classic".[4]In 1995, Cabaret was selected by the Library of Congress for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 2006, Cabaret ranked No. 5 on the American Film Institute's list of best musicals; the song "Cabaret" was ranked No. 18 on their 100 Years...100 Songs list in 2004. In 2007, this film ranked No. 63 on AFI's 10th anniversary list of the 100 Greatest American Movies.The film was nominated for ten Academy Awards in 1973, winning a total of eight:[5]It was also nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture and the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay, losing both to The Godfather. Cabaret holds the record for most Academy Awards won by a film which did not win the Best Picture award.[6]The film also won seven BAFTA Awards including Best Film, Best Direction and Best Actress as well as the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture (Musical/Comedy).The making of Cabaret is recounted in Cabaret (Music on Film) by Stephen Tropiano (Limelight Books, 2011).The film was first released to DVD in 1998. There have been subsequent releases in 2003, 2008, and 2012.The film's international ancillary distribution rights are owned by ABC (currently part of The Walt Disney Company), while Warner Bros. (which inherited the film from Lorimar, Allied Artists' successor-in-interest) has domestic distribution rights. Today, Warner shares the film's copyright with production partner ABC.Fremantle Media (owners of UK DVD rights under license from ABC/Disney) planned a Blu-ray release of the film in 2008 or 2009, but have since announced they no longer plan to do so.In April 2012, Warner unveiled a 40th Anniversary screening of the new restoration of the film. "Cabaret" has been sold on standard-definition DVD from Warner Bros. But it was unavailable in high-def or for digital presentation because of a vertical scratch that ran through 1,000 feet, or 10 minutes, of one of its reels, said Ned Price, vice president of mastering and restoration for Warner Bros. The damage apparently was caused by a piece of dirt that had rolled through the length of the reel, starting with a scene in which York's character has a confrontation with a pro-Nazi boarding house resident, and cut into the emulsion. With the damaged images digitally "painted out" using bits from surrounding areas, "the difficult part was matching the grain structure so the fix was invisible". After automated digital repair attempts failed, the 1,000 feet of damaged film was hand painted using a computer stylus.[7]February 13, 1972(1972-02-13)1 Plot

1.1 Subplots

1.1 Subplots2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Pre-production
3.2 Casting
3.3 Filming

3.1 Pre-production3.2 Casting3.3 Filming4 Differences between film and stage version5 Musical numbers6 Release

6.1 Critical reaction
6.2 Accolades
6.3 Home video

6.1 Critical reaction6.2 Accolades6.3 Home video7 See also8 References9 External links1.1 Subplots3.1 Pre-production3.2 Casting3.3 Filming6.1 Critical reaction6.2 Accolades6.3 Home videoLiza Minnelli as Sally BowlesMichael York as Brian RobertsJoel Grey as The EmceeHelmut Griem as Maximilian von HeuneFritz Wepper as Fritz WendelMarisa Berenson as Natalia LandauerHelen Vita as FrostOliver Collignon (Mark Lambert, singing)[3] as Nazi youthSo What?Don't Tell MamaTelephone SongPerfectly MarvelousWhy Should I Wake Up?MeeskiteWhat Would You Do?Best Director (Bob Fosse)Best Actress in a Leading Role (Liza Minnelli)Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Joel Grey)Best Cinematography (Geoffrey Unsworth)Best Film Editing (David Bretherton)Best Original Song Score or Adaptation Score (Ralph Burns)Best Art Direction (Rolf Zehetbauer, Hans Jrgen Kiebach, Herbert Strabel)Best Sound (Robert Knudson, David Hildyard)List of American films of 1972Cabaret at the Internet Movie DatabaseCabaret at Rotten TomatoesCabaret at MetacriticClose Encounters of the Third Kind (often referred to as Close Encounters or CE3K) is a 1977 science fiction-drama written and directed by Steven Spielberg and features actors Richard Dreyfuss, Franois Truffaut, Melinda Dillon, Teri Garr, Bob Balaban, and Cary Guffey. It tells the story of Roy Neary, a lineman in Indiana, whose life changes after a close encounter with an unidentified flying object (UFO).Close Encounters was a long-cherished project for Spielberg. In late 1973, he developed a deal with Columbia Pictures for a science fiction film. Though Spielberg receives sole credit for the script, he was assisted by Paul Schrader, John Hill, David Giler, Hal Barwood, Matthew Robbins, and Jerry Belson, all of whom contributed to the screenplay in varying degrees. The title is derived from ufologist J. Allen Hynek's classification of close encounters with aliens, in which the third kind denotes human observations of actual aliens or "animate beings". Douglas Trumbull served as the visual effects supervisor, while Carlo Rambaldi designed the aliens.Close Encounters was released in November 1977 to critical and financial success, grossing out $337,700,000 of the film's $20 million budget.The film was reissued in 1980 as Close Encounters of the Third Kind: The Special Edition, which featured additional scenes. A third cut of the film was released to home video (and later DVD) in 1998. The film received numerous awards and nominations at the 50th Academy Awards, 32nd British Academy Film Awards, the 35th Golden Globe Awards, the Saturn Awards and has been widely acclaimed by the American Film Institute. In December 2007, it was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.[2]In the Sonoran Desert, French scientist Claude Lacombe and his American interpreter, mapmaker David Laughlin, along with other government scientific researchers, discover Flight 19, a squadron of Grumman TBF Avengers that went missing more than 30 years earlier. The planes are intact and operational, but there is no sign of the pilots. An old man who witnessed the event claimed "the sun came out at night, and sang to him." They also find a lost ship in the Gobi Desert named SS Cotopaxi. At an Air Traffic Control center in Indianapolis, Indiana, a controller listens as two airline flights almost have a mid-air collision with an apparent unidentified flying object (UFO). In Muncie, Indiana, 3-year-old Barry Guiler is awakened in the night when his toys start operating on their own. Fascinated, he gets out of bed and discovers something or someone (off-screen) in the kitchen. He runs outside, forcing his mother, Jillian, to chase after him.Investigating one of a series of large-scale power outages, Indiana electrical lineman Roy Neary experiences a close encounter with a UFO, when it flies over his truck and lightly burns the side of his face with its bright lights. The UFO, along with three others, are pursued by Neary and three police cars, but the spacecrafts fly off into the night sky. Roy becomes fascinated by UFOs, much to the dismay of his wife, Ronnie. He also becomes increasingly obsessed with subliminal, mental images of a mountain-like shape and begins to make models of it. Jillian also becomes obsessed with sketching a unique-looking mountain. Soon after, she is terrorized in her home by a UFO encounter in which Barry is abducted by unseen beings.Lacombe and Laughlinalong with a group of United Nations expertscontinue to investigate increasing UFO activity and strange, related occurrences. Witnesses report that the UFOs make distinctive sounds: a five-tone musical phrase in a major scale. Scientists broadcast the phrase to outer space, but are mystified by the response: a seemingly meaningless series of numbers repeated over and over, until Laughlin recognizes it as a set of geographical coordinates pointing to Devils Tower near Moorcroft, Wyoming. Lacombe and the U.S. military converge on Wyoming. The United States Army evacuates the area, planting false reports in the media that a train wreck has spilled a toxic nerve gas, all the while preparing a secret landing zone for the UFOs and their occupants.Meanwhile, Roy's increasingly erratic behavior causes Ronnie to leave him, taking their three children with her. When a despairing Roy inadvertently sees a television news program about the train wreck near Devils Tower, he realizes the mental image of a mountain plaguing him is real. Jillian sees the same broadcast, and she and Roy, as well as others with similar visions and experiences, travel to the site in spite of the false public warnings about nerve gas.While most of the civilians who are drawn to the site are apprehended by the Army, Roy and Jillian persist and make it to the site just as dozens of UFOs appear in the night sky. The government specialists at the site begin to communicate with the UFOs by use of light and sound on a large electrical billboard. Following this, an enormous mother ship lands at the site, returning people who had been abducted over the past decades, including Barry, and the missing pilots from Flight 19 and sailors from the Cotopaxi, who have not aged since their abductions. The government officials decide to include Roy in a group of people whom they have selected to be potential visitors to the mothership, and hastily prepare him. As the aliens finally emerge from the mothership, they select Roy to join them on their travels. As Roy enters the mothership, one of the aliens pauses for a few moments with the humans. Lacombe uses Curwen hand signs that correspond to the five note alien tonal phrase. The alien replies with the same gestures, smiles, and returns to its ship, which lifts off into the night sky.J. Allen Hynek and Stanton T. Friedman make cameo appearances at the closing scene. Spielberg's friends Hal Barwood and Matthew Robbins cameo as two World War II pilots returning from the mother ship. Real life ARP technician Phil Dodds cameos as the operator of the ARP 2500 synthesizer communicating with the alien ship. Jerry Garcia also makes an appearance in the crowd scene.The film's origins can be traced to director Steven Spielberg's youth, when he and his father saw a meteor shower in New Jersey.[3] As a teenager, Spielberg completed the full-length science fiction film Firelight. Many scenes from Firelight would be incorporated in Close Encounters on a shot-for-shot basis.[7] In 1970 he wrote a short story called Experiences about a lovers' lane in a Midwestern United States farming community and the "light show" a group of teenagers see in the night sky.[8] In late 1973, during post-production on The Sugarland Express, Spielberg developed a deal with Columbia Pictures for a science fiction film. 20th Century Fox previously turned down the offer.[8] Julia and Michael Phillips instantly signed on as producers.[9]He first considered doing a documentary or a low-budget feature film about people who believed in UFOs. Spielberg decided "a film that depended on state of the art technology couldn't be made for $2.5million."[8] Borrowing a phrase from the ending of The Thing from Another World, he retitled the film Watch the Skies, rewriting the premise concerning Project Blue Book and pitching the concept to Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz. Katz remembered "It had flying saucers from outer space landing on Robertson Boulevard [in West Hollywood, California]. I go, 'Steve, that's the worst idea I ever heard."[8] Spielberg brought Paul Schrader to write the script in December 1973 with principal photography to begin in late-1974. However, Spielberg started work on Jaws in 1974, pushing Watch the Skies back.[8]With the financial and critical success of Jaws, Spielberg earned a vast amount of creative control from Columbia, including the right to make the film any way he wanted.[10] Schrader turned in his script, which Spielberg called, "one of the most embarrassing screenplays ever professionally turned in to a major film studio or director. It was a terribly guilt-ridden story not about UFOs at all."[4] Titled Kingdom Come, the script's protagonist was a 45-year-old Air Force Officer named Paul Van Owen who worked with Project Blue Book. "[His] job for the government is to ridicule and debunk flying saucers." Schrader continued. "One day he has an encounter. He goes to the government, threatening to blow the lid off to the public. Instead, he and the government spend 15 years trying to make contact."[4] Spielberg and Schrader experienced creative differences, hiring John Hill to rewrite.[4] At one point the main character was a police officer.[3] Spielberg "[found] it hard to identify with men in uniform. I wanted to have Mr. Everyday Regular Fella." Spielberg rejected the Schrader/Hill script during post-production on Jaws.[4] He reflected, "they wanted to make it like a James Bond adventure."[11]David Giler performed a rewrite; Hal Barwood and Matthew Robbins,[3] friends of Spielberg, suggested the plot device of a kidnapped child. Spielberg then began to write the script. The song "When You Wish upon a Star" from Pinocchio influenced Spielberg's writing style. "I hung my story on the mood the song created, the way it affected me personally."[4] Jerry Belson and Spielberg wrote the shooting script together. In the end, Spielberg was given solo writing credit.[4] During pre-production, the title was changed from Kingdom Come to Close Encounters of the Third Kind.[10] J. Allen Hynek, who worked with the United States Air Force on Project Blue Book, was hired as a scientific consultant. Hynek felt "even though the film is fiction, it's based for the most part on the known facts of the UFO mystery, and it certainly catches the flavor of the phenomenon. Spielberg was under enormous pressure to make another blockbuster after Jaws, but he decided to make a UFO movie. He put his career on the line."[4] USAF and NASA declined to cooperate on the film.[10]Principal photography began on May 16, 1976. Spielberg did not want to do any location shooting because of his negative experience on Jaws and wanted to shoot Close Encounters entirely on sound stages, but eventually dropped the idea.[12]Filming took place in Burbank, California; Devils Tower National Monument in Wyoming; two abandoned World War II airship hangars at the former Brookley Air Force Base in Mobile, Alabama; and the Louisville and Nashville Railroad depot in Bay Minette. The home where Barry was abducted is located outside the town of Fairhope, Alabama. Roy Neary's home is at Carlisle Drive East, Mobile, Alabama. The UFOs fly through the toll booth at the Vincent Thomas Bridge, San Pedro, California. The Gobi Desert sequence was photographed at the Dumont Dunes, California, and the Dharmsala-India exteriors were actually filmed at the small village of Hal near Khalapur 35 miles (56km) outside Mumbai, India.[12] The hangars in Alabama were six times larger than the biggest sound stage in the world.[10][13] Various technical and budgetary problems occurred during filming. Spielberg called Close Encounters "twice as bad and twice as expensive [as Jaws]".[4]Matters worsened when Columbia Pictures experienced financial difficulties. Spielberg estimated the film would cost $2.7million to make in his original 1973 pitch to Columbia, but the final budget came to $19.4million.[10] Columbia studio executive John Veich remembered, "If we knew it was going to cost that much, we wouldn't have greenlighted it because we didn't have the money."[10] Spielberg hired Joe Alves, his collaborator on Jaws, as production designer.[5] In addition the 1976 Atlantic hurricane season brought tropical storms to Alabama. A large portion of the sound stage in Alabama was damaged because of a lightning strike.[3]Cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond said that, during the time of shooting for the film, Steve got more ideas by watching movies every night. He added more shots to the shooting schedule, pushing it back.[4] Zsigmond previously turned down the chance to work on Jaws. In her book You'll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again, producer Julia Phillips wrote highly profane remarks about Spielberg, Zsigmond, and Truffaut, because she was fired during post-production due to a cocaine addiction. Phillips blamed it on Spielberg being a perfectionist.[10]Douglas Trumbull was the visual effects supervisor, while Carlo Rambaldi designed the aliens. Trumbull joked that the visual effects budget, at $3.3million, could have been used to produce another film [in addition to this one]. His work helped lead to advances in motion control photography. The mother ship was designed by Ralph McQuarrie and built by Greg Jein. The look of the ship was inspired by an oil refinery Spielberg saw at night in India.[4] Instead of the metallic hardware look used in Star Wars, the emphasis was on a more luminescent look for the UFOs. One of the UFO models was actually an oxygen mask with lights attached to it, used because of its irregular shape. As a subtle in-joke, Dennis Muren (who had just finished working on Star Wars) put a small R2-D2 model onto the underside of the mothership.[3] The model of the mothership is now on display in the Smithsonian Institution's Air and Space Museum Udvar-Hazy Annex at Washington Dulles Airport in Chantilly, Virginia.[3]Since Close Encounters was filmed anamorphically, the visual effects sequences were shot in 70 mm film to better conform with the 35 mm film used for the rest of the movie. A test reel using computer-generated imagery was used for the UFO aliens, but Spielberg found it would be too expensive and ineffective since CGI was new technology in the mid-1970s.[3]The small aliens in the final scenes were played by local girls in Mobile, Alabama. That decision was requested by Spielberg because he felt "girls move more gracefully than boys."[3] Puppetry was attempted for the aliens, but the idea failed. However, Rambaldi successfully used puppetry to depict two of the aliens, the first being a marionette (for the tall alien that is the first to be seen emerging from the mothership) and an articulated puppet for the alien that communicates via hand signals with Lacombe near the end of the film.[3]Close Encounters is the first collaboration between film editor Michael Kahn and Spielberg. Their working relationship continued for the rest of Spielberg's films. Spielberg stated that no film he has ever made since has been as hard to edit as the last 25 minutes of Close Encounters and he and Kahn would go through thousands of feet of footage just to find the right shots for the end sequence. When Kahn and Spielberg completed the first cut of the film, Spielberg was dissatisfied, feeling "there wasn't enough wow-ness".[3]Pick-ups were commissioned but cinematographer Vilmos Zsigmond could not participate due to other commitments.[10] John A. Alonzo, Lszl Kovcs, William A. Fraker and Douglas Slocombe worked on the pick-ups.[10]Lacombe was originally to find Flight 19 hidden in the Amazon Rainforest, but the idea was changed to the Sonoran Desert. Composer John Williams wrote over 300 examples of the iconic five-tone motif before Spielberg chose the right one. Spielberg called Williams' work "When You Wish upon a Star meets science fiction".[3] Spielberg wanted to have "When You Wish upon a Star" in the closing credits, but was denied permission (though the song's signature melody can be heard briefly just before Roy Neary turns to board the mothership). He also took 7.5 minutes out from the preview.[5]Post-production was completed by June 1977[citation needed], too late for the film to be released as a 'summer blockbuster' which might have been just as well, as Star Wars opened that summer.The score was composed, conducted and produced by John Williams, who had previously won an Academy Award for his work on Spielberg's Jaws. Much like his two-note Jaws theme, the "five-tone" motif for Close Encounters has since become ingrained in popular culture (the five tones are used by scientists to communicate with the visiting spaceship as a mathematical language as well as being incorporated into the film's signature theme). The score was recorded at Warner Bros. Scoring studios in Burbank, California.Williams was nominated for two Academy Awards in 1978, one for his score to Star Wars and one for his score to Close Encounters. He won for Star Wars, though he later won two Grammy Awards in 1979 for his Close Encounters score (one for Best Original Film Score and one for Best Instrumental Composition for "Theme from Close Encounters").[14]The soundtrack album was released on vinyl album (with a gatefold sleeve), 8-track tape, and audio cassette by Arista Records in 1977, with a total running time of 41 minutes (it was later released on compact disc in 1990). The soundtrack album was a commercial success, peaking at #17 on the US Billboard album chart in February 1978 and was certified Gold by the RIAA for 500,000 copies shipped.[15] It also peaked at #40 in the UK album charts.[16]Although not included on the original soundtrack album, a 7" single, "Theme from Close Encounters of the Third Kind", was included with the album as a free bonus item. Despite being a giveaway, Billboard chart rules at that time allowed the single itself to chart, and it peaked at #13 on the US Billboard Hot 100 in March 1978. The single was later added as a bonus track to the cassette.Following the release of the "Collector's Edition" of the film in 1998, a new expanded soundtrack was released on compact disc by Arista. The "Collectors Edition Soundtrack" was made using 20-bit digital remastering from the original tapes, and contained 26 tracks totalling 77 minutes of music. The CD also came with extensive liner notes including an interview with Williams. Cues were given new titles, and it also contained previously unreleased material, as well as material that was recorded but never used in the film. 1978 reissue - bonus track (cassette), free bonus 7" single (vinyl album).Film critic Charlene Engel observed Close Encounters "suggests that humankind has reached the point where it is ready to enter the community of the cosmos. While it is a computer interface which makes the final musical conversation with the alien guests possible, the characteristics bringing Neary to make his way to Devils Tower have little to do with technical expertise or computer literacy. These are virtues taught in schools that will be evolved in the 21st century."[17] The film also evokes typical science fiction archetypes and motifs. The film portrays new technologies as a natural and expected outcome of human development and indication of health and growth.[17]Other critics found a variety of Judeo-Christian analogies. Devils Tower parallels Mount Sinai, the aliens as God and Roy Neary as Moses. Cecil B. DeMille's The Ten Commandments is seen on television at the Neary household. Some found close relations between Elijah and Roy; Elijah was taken into a "chariot of fire", akin to Roy going in the UFO. Climbing Devils Tower behind Jillian and faltering, Neary exhorts Jillian to keep moving and not to look back, similar to Lot's wife who looked back at Sodom and turned into a pillar of salt.[17] Spielberg explained, "I wanted to make Close Encounters a very accessible story about the everyday individual who has a sighting that overturns his life, and throws it in to complete upheaval as he starts to become more and more obsessed with this experience."[13]Roy's wife Ronnie attempts to hide the sunburn caused by Roy's exposure to the UFOs and wants him to forget his encounter with them. She is embarrassed and bewildered by what has happened to him and desperately wants her ordinary life back. The expression of his lost life is seen when he is sculpting a huge model of Devils Tower in his living room, with his family deserting him.[17] Roy's obsession with an idea implanted by an alien intelligence, his construction of the model, and his gradual loss of contact with his wife, mimic the events in the short story "Dulcie and Decorum" (1955) by Damon Knight.Close Encounters also studies the form of "youth spiritual yearning". Barry Guiler, the unfearing child who refers to the UFOs and their paraphernalia as "toys", serves as a motif for childlike innocence and openness in the face of the unknown.[17] Spielberg also compared the theme of communication as highlighting that of tolerance. "If we can talk to aliens in Close Encounters of the Third Kind," he said, "why not with the Reds in the Cold War?"[18] Sleeping is the final obstacle to overcome in the ascent of Devils Tower. Roy, Jillian Guiler and a third invitee climb the mountain pursued by government helicopters spraying sleeping gas. The third person stops to rest, is gassed, and falls into a deep sleep.[17]In his interview with Spielberg on Inside the Actors Studio, James Lipton suggested Close Encounters had another, more personal theme for Spielberg: "Your father was a computer engineer; your mother was a concert pianist, and when the spaceship lands, they make music together on the computer", suggesting that Roy Neary's boarding the spaceship is Spielberg's wish to be reunited with his parents. In a 2005 interview, Spielberg stated that he made Close Encounters when he did not have children, and if he were making it today, he would never have had Neary leave his family and go on the mother ship.[19]The film was originally to be released in summer 1977, but was pushed back to November because of the various problems during production,[5] Upon its release, Close Encounters became a box office success, grossing $116.39million in North America and $171.7million in foreign countries, totaling $288million.[20] It became Columbia Pictures' most successful film at that time.[13] Jonathan Rosenbaum refers to the film as "the best expression of Spielberg's benign, dreamy-eyed vision."[21] A.D. Murphy of Variety gave a positive review but felt "Close Encounters lacks the warmth and humanity of George Lucas's Star Wars". Murphy found most of the film slow-paced, but praised the film's climax.[22] Pauline Kael called it "a kid's film in the best sense."[7] Jean Renoir compared Spielberg's storytelling to Jules Verne and Georges Mlis.[6] Ray Bradbury declared it the greatest science fiction film ever made.[23] Based on 40 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes, 95% ("Certified Fresh") of the reviewers have enjoyed the film and the site's consensus states "Close Encounters' most iconic bits (the theme, the mashed-potato sculpture, etc.) have been so thoroughly absorbed into the culture that it's easy to forget that its treatment of aliens as peaceful beings rather than warmongering monsters was somewhat groundbreaking in 1977."[24]Spielberg's 1998 Collector's Edition was given a limited release as part of a roadshow featuring select films to celebrate Columbia Pictures' 75th anniversary in 1999. It was the first and only time this version of the film has been shown theatrically.On the final cut privilege, Spielberg was dissatisfied with the film. "Columbia Pictures was experiencing financial problems, and they were depending on this film to save their company. "I wanted to have another six months to finish off this film, and release it in summer 1978. They told me they needed this film out immediately," Spielberg explained. "Anyway, Close Encounters was a huge financial success and I told them I wanted to make my own director's cut. They agreed on the condition that I show the inside of the mother ship so they could have something to hang a [reissue marketing] campaign on. I never should have shown the inside of the mother ship."[3] In 1979, Columbia gave Spielberg $1.5million to produce what became the "Special Edition" of the film. Spielberg added seven minutes of new footage, but also deleted or shortened various existing scenes by a total of ten minutes, so that the Special Edition was three minutes shorter than the original 1977 release.[6]The Special Edition featured several new character development scenes, the discovery of the SS Cotopaxi in the Gobi Desert, and a view of the inside of the mothership. Close Encounters of the Third Kind: The Special Edition was released in August 1980, making a further $15.7million, accumulating a final $303.7million box office gross.[6][20] Roger Ebert "thought the original film was an astonishing achievement, capturing the feeling of awe and wonder we have when considering the likelihood of life beyond the Earth. ... This new version ... is, quite simply, a better film ... Why didn't Spielberg make it this good the first time?"[25]In 1998, Spielberg recut Close Encounters again for what would become the "Collector's Edition," to be released on home video and laserdisc. This version of the film is something of a re-edit of the original 1977 release with some elements of the 1980 Special Edition, but omits the mothership interior scenes which Spielberg felt should have remained a mystery. The laserdisc edition also includes a new 101-minute documentary, The Making of Close Encounters, which was produced in 1997 and features interviews with Spielberg, the main cast, and notable crew members. There have also been many other alternate versions of the film for network and syndicated television, as well as a previous LaserDisc version. Some of these even combined all released material from the 1977 and 1980 versions, but none of these versions were edited by Spielberg, who regards the "Collector's Edition" as his definitive version of Close Encounters.The film was released on DVD in June 2001 as a two-disc set that contained the "Collector's Edition".[26] The second disc contained a wealth of extra features including the 101-minute "Making Of" documentary from 1997, a featurette from 1977, trailers, and deleted scenes that included, among other things, the mothership interiors from the 1980 Special Edition. James Berardinelli felt "Close Encounters is still unquestionably a great movie. Its universal appeal gave movie-goers something to be excited about during 197778 as the first in a wave of post-Star Wars science fiction films broke. Today, the movie stands up remarkably well. The story is fresh and compelling, the special effects are as remarkable as anything that CGI can do, and the music represents some of John Williams' best work."[27] Emanuel Levy also gave a highly-positive review. "Spielberg's greatest achievement is to make a warm, likable sci-fi feature, deviating in spirit, tone and ideology from the dark, noirish sci-fi films that dominated the 1950s and Cold War mentality. He ultimately succeeded."[28]Close Encounters was given a second DVD release and a Blu-ray Disc release in November 2007. Released for the film's 30th anniversary, the set contained all three official versions of the film from 1977, 1980, and 1998 and a new interview with Spielberg, who talks about the film's impact 30 years after its release. The set also includes the 1977 featurette, various trailers, and the 1997 "Making Of" documentary  though this is now split over three discs rather than as a single feature as with the 2001 DVD release. In addition to these features, the 2-disc Blu-ray set also included storyboard-to-scene comparisons, an extensive photo gallery, and a "View from Above: Editor's Fact track" highlighting the different scenes in each version of the movie.Shortly after the film's release in late 1977, Spielberg desired to do either a sequel or prequel, before deciding against it. He explained, "The army's knowledge and ensuing cover-up is so subterranean that it would take a creative screen story, perhaps someone else making the picture and giving it the equal time it deserves."[11]The film was nominated for eight Oscars at the 50th Academy Awards, including Direction, Supporting Actress (Melinda Dillon), Visual Effects, Art Direction (Joe Alves, Daniel A. Lomino, Phil Abramson), Original Music Score, Film Editing, and Sound (Robert Knudson, Robert Glass, Don MacDougall and Gene Cantamessa).[29] The film's only win was for Vilmos Zsigmond's cinematography, although the Academy honored the film's sound effects editing with a Special Achievement Award.[30] At the 32nd British Academy Film Awards, Close Encounters won Best Production Design, and was nominated for Best Film, Direction, Screenplay, Actor in a Supporting Role (Franois Truffaut), Music, Cinematography, Editing, and Sound.[31]Close Encounters lost the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation to Star Wars,[32] but was successful at the Saturn Awards. There, the film tied with Star Wars for Direction and Music, but won Best Writing. Richard Dreyfuss, Melinda Dillon and the visual effects department received nominations. Close Encounters was nominated for Best Science Fiction Film.[33] The film received four more nominations at the 35th Golden Globe Awards.[34]When asked in 1990 to select a single "master image" that summed up his film career, Spielberg chose the shot of Barry opening his living room door to see the blazing orange light from the UFO. "That was beautiful but awful light, just like fire coming through the doorway. [Barry's] very small, and it's a very large door, and there's a lot of promise or danger outside that door."[7] In 2007, Close Encounters was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress, and was added to the National Film Registry for preservation.[35] In American Film Institute polls, Close Encounters has been voted the 64th greatest film of all time,[36] 31st most heart-pounding,[37] and 58th most inspiring.[38] Additionally, the film was nominated for the top 10 science fiction films in AFI's 10 Top 10[39] and the tenth anniversary edition of the 100 Movies list.[40] The score by John Williams was nominated for AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores.[41]Alongside Star Wars and Superman, Close Encounters led to the reemergence of science fiction films.[42][43] In 1985 Spielberg donated $100,000 to the Planetary Society for Megachannel ExtraTerrestrial Assay.[4] In the 1979 James Bond film Moonraker the five-note sequence is heard when a scientist punches the combination into an electronic door lock. In the South Park episode "Imaginationland", a government scientist uses the five-note sequence to try to open a portal.[44] In "Over Logging", a government scientist uses the five-note sequence to try to get the central Internet router working.[45] The "mashed potato" sculpture was parodied in the film UHF,[46] the film Canadian Bacon, an episode of Spaced, an episode of The X-Files, an episode of That 70's Show, and an episode of The Simpsons.[47] It was satirized in the 200th issue of Mad Magazine, July 1978, by Stan Hart and Mort Drucker as Clod Encounters of the Absurd Kind.[48]In 2011, ABC aired a primetime special, Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time that counted down the best movies chosen by fans based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and People. Close Encounters of the Third Kind was selected as the #5 Best Sci-Fi Film.[citation needed]In the 2012 Deadmau5 album Album Title Goes Here, track no. 9, titled "Closer," features the five-note sequence as the basis for the song's opening and main melodic motif.[49]American Film Institute ListsNovember 16, 1977(1977-11-16)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Filming
3.3 Visual effects
3.4 Post-production

3.1 Development3.2 Filming3.3 Visual effects3.4 Post-production4 Soundtrack

4.1 1977 original album
4.2 1998 Collector's Edition

4.1 1977 original album4.2 1998 Collector's Edition5 Themes6 Release

6.1 Reception
6.2 Reissue and home video
6.3 Legacy

6.1 Reception6.2 Reissue and home video6.3 Legacy7 References

7.1 Notes
7.2 Bibliography
7.3 Further reading

7.1 Notes7.2 Bibliography7.3 Further reading8 External links3.1 Development3.2 Filming3.3 Visual effects3.4 Post-production4.1 1977 original album4.2 1998 Collector's Edition6.1 Reception6.2 Reissue and home video6.3 Legacy7.1 Notes7.2 Bibliography7.3 Further readingRichard Dreyfuss as Roy Neary, an electrical lineman in Indiana who encounters and forms an obsession with unidentified flying objects. Steve McQueen was Spielberg's first choice. Although McQueen was impressed with the script, he felt he was not specifically right for the role as he was unable to cry on cue. Dustin Hoffman, Al Pacino, and Gene Hackman turned down the part as well.[3] Jack Nicholson turned it down because of scheduling conflicts. Spielberg explained when filming Jaws, "Dreyfuss talked me into casting him. He listened to about 155-days worth of Close Encounters. He even contributed ideas."[4] Dreyfuss reflected, "I launched myself into a campaign to get the part. I would walk by Steve's office and say stuff like 'Al Pacino has no sense of humor' or 'Jack Nicholson is too crazy'. I eventually convinced him to cast me."[3]Franois Truffaut as Claude Lacombe, a French government scientist in charge of UFO-related activities in the United States. Grard Depardieu, Philippe Noiret, Jean-Louis Trintignant, and Lino Ventura were considered for the role. During filming, Truffaut used his free time to write the script for The Man Who Loved Women. He also worked on a novel titled The Actor, a project he abandoned.[5]Melinda Dillon as Jillian Guiler, Barry's single mother. She forms a similar obsession to Roy's, and the two become friends. Teri Garr wanted to portray Jillian, but was cast as Ronnie. Hal Ashby, who worked with Dillon on Bound for Glory, suggested her for the part to Spielberg. Dillon was cast three days before filming began.[3]Teri Garr as Veronica "Ronnie" Neary, Roy's wife. Amy Irving auditioned for the role.[6]Cary Guffey as Barry Guiler, Jillian's young child abducted in the middle of the film. Spielberg conducted a series of method acting techniques to help Guffey, who was cast when he was just three years old.[3]Bob Balaban as David Laughlin, Lacombe's assistant and English-French interpreter. They meet for the first time in the Sonoran Desert at the beginning of the film.Josef Sommer as Larry Butler, a curious man who meets Roy and Jillian in Wyoming and attempts to scale Devils Tower with them.Lance Henriksen as Robert.Roberts Blossom as Farmer, a radical who claims to have seen Sasquatch.AFI's 100 Years100 Movies - #64AFI's 100 Years100 Thrills - #31AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - NominatedAFI's 100 Years100 Cheers - #58AFI's 100 Years100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - NominatedAFI's 10 Top 10 - Nominated Science Fiction FilmJoseph McBride (1997). Steven Spielberg: A Biography. New York City: Faber and Faber. ISBN0-571-19177-0.Ray Morton (1 November 2007). Close Encounters of the Third Kind: The Making of Steven Spielberg's Classic Film. Applause Theatre and Cinema Books. ISBN978-1-55783-710-3.Bob Balaban (2002). Spielberg, Truffaut & Me: Close Encounters of the Third Kind - An Actor's Diary. Titan Books. ISBN978-1-84023-430-5.Leslie Waller (1977). Close Encounters of the Third Kind. novelization of the film. Del Pub. ISBN978-0-440-11433-8.CE3KONLINEClose Encounters of the Third Kind at the Internet Movie DatabaseClose Encounters of the Third Kind at AllRoviClose Encounters of the Third Kind at Box Office MojoClose Encounters of the Third Kind at Rotten TomatoesClose Encounters of the Third Kind at The NumbersClose Encounters of the Third Kind at Filmsite.orgThe Silence of the Lambs is a 1991 American thriller film that blends elements of the crime and horror genres.[2] It was directed by Jonathan Demme and stars Jodie Foster, Anthony Hopkins, Ted Levine, and Scott Glenn. It is based on the 1988 novel of the same name by Thomas Harris, his second to feature Hannibal Lecter, a brilliant psychiatrist and cannibalistic serial killer.In the film, Clarice Starling, a young FBI trainee, seeks the advice of the imprisoned Dr. Lecter to apprehend another serial killer, known only as "Buffalo Bill".The Silence of the Lambs was released on February 14, 1991, and grossed over $272 million. The film was the third film to win Oscars in all the top five categories: Best Picture, Best Actress, Best Actor, Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay. It is also the first winner of Best Picture widely considered to be a horror film, and only the second such film to be nominated in the category, after The Exorcist in 1973.[3][4] The film is considered "culturally, historically or aesthetically" significant by the US Library of Congress and was selected to be preserved in the National Film Registry in 2011.[5]Clarice Starling (Foster) is pulled from her training at the FBI Academy at Quantico, Virginia, by Jack Crawford (Glenn) of the Bureau's Behavioral Science Unit. He tasks her with interviewing Hannibal Lecter (Hopkins), a former psychiatrist and incarcerated cannibalistic serial killer, believing Lecter's insight might be useful in the pursuit of a serial killer nicknamed "Buffalo Bill" (Levine), who skins his female victims' corpses.Starling travels to the Baltimore State Hospital for the Criminally Insane, where she is led by Dr. Frederick Chilton (Heald) to Lecter's solitary quarters. Although initially pleasant and courteous, Lecter grows impatient with Starling's attempts at "dissecting" him and rebuffs her. As she is leaving, one of the prisoners flicks semen at her. Lecter, who considers the discourtesy "unspeakably ugly", calls Starling back and tells her to seek out an old patient of his. This leads her to a storage shed where she discovers a man's severed head. She returns to Lecter, who tells her that the man is linked to Buffalo Bill. He offers to profile Buffalo Bill on the condition that he be transferred away from Chilton, whom he detests.When Buffalo Bill kidnaps a Senator's daughter, Catherine Martin, Crawford authorizes Starling to offer Lecter a fake deal promising a prison transfer if he provides information that helps find Buffalo Bill and rescue the abductee. Instead, Lecter begins a game of quid pro quo with Starling, offering comprehensive clues and insights about Buffalo Bill if Starling will give him information about her own past, something she was advised not to do. Chilton secretly records the conversation and reveals Starling's deal as a sham before offering to transfer Lecter in exchange for a deal of Chilton's own making. Lecter agrees and is flown to Memphis, Tennessee, where he reveals personal information on Buffalo Bill to federal agents.As the manhunt begins, Starling visits Lecter at his special cell in a Tennessee courthouse and confronts him with her decryption of the name he provided ("Louis Friend", an anagram of "iron sulfide", also known as fool's gold). Lecter refuses Starling's pleas for the truth and forces her to recount her traumatic childhood. She tells him how she was orphaned and relocated to a relative's farm, where she discovered a lamb slaughterhouse and made a failed attempt to rescue one of the lambs. Lecter gives her back the case files on Buffalo Bill after their conversation is interrupted by Chilton and the police who escort her from the building. Later that evening, Lecter kills his two guards, escapes from his cell and disappears.Starling analyzes Lecter's annotations to the case files and realizes that Buffalo Bill knew his first victim personally. Starling travels to the victim's hometown and discovers that Buffalo Bill was a tailor, with dresses and dress patterns identical to the patches of skin removed from each of his victims. She telephones Crawford to inform him that Buffalo Bill is trying to fashion a "woman suit" of real skin, but Crawford is already en route to make an arrest, having cross-referenced Lecter's notes with hospital archives and finding a man named Jame Gumb, who once applied unsuccessfully for a sex-change operation. Starling continues interviewing friends of Buffalo Bill's first victim in Ohio while Crawford leads an FBI tactical team to Gumb's address in Illinois. The house in Illinois is empty and Starling is led to the house of "Jack Gordon", who she realizes is actually Jame Gumb. She pursues him into his multi-room basement, where she discovers that Catherine is still alive, but trapped in a dry well. After turning off the basement lights, Gumb stalks Starling in the dark with night-vision goggles but gives his position away when he cocks his revolver; Starling turns around just in time and kills him.Some time later at her FBI Academy graduation party, Starling receives a phone call from Lecter, who is at an airport in Bimini. He assures her that he does not plan to pursue her and asks her to return the favor, which she says she cannot do. Lecter then hangs up the phone, saying that he is "having an old friend for dinner" and begins following a newly-arrived Chilton before disappearing into the crowd.The role of Dr. Hannibal Lecter was originally to be played by Gene Hackman, who also wished to direct; but he later withdrew from the project owing to the graphic content of the evolving screenplay.[6] Michelle Pfeiffer was offered the role of Clarice Starling, but turned it down, later saying, "(It was) a difficult decision, but I got nervous about the subject matter".[7]The Silence of the Lambs was filmed primarily in and around Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, with some scenes in nearby northern West Virginia.[8] The film was distributed by Orion Pictures.The Silence of the Lambs was released on February 14, 1991, grossing $13,766,814 during its opening weekend. Surpassing its own budget after one week, the film proved to be a major box office success. After its initial run, the film grossed $130,742,922 domestically with a total worldwide gross of $272,742,922.[1] The film was the fourth highest grossing film of 1991.[9]Anthony Hopkins, Jodie Foster, and Ted Levine garnered much acclaim for their performances. Critics were particularly impressed with Hopkins' performance, even though Hopkins' screen time is only a little more than 16 minutes.[10]The Silence of the Lambs was a sleeper hit that gradually gained widespread success[11] and critical acclaim; Rotten Tomatoes records that The Silence of the Lambs received a 96% "fresh" rating.[12] Roger Ebert specifically mentioned the "terrifying qualities" of Hannibal Lecter,[13] and has since recognized the film as a "horror masterpiece", alongside such classics as Nosferatu, Psycho, and Halloween.[14] However, the film is also notable for being one of two multi-Oscar winners disapproved of by Ebert's colleague, Gene Siskel, the other being Unforgiven.[15]The film won the Big Five Academy Awards: Best Picture, Best Director (Demme), Best Actor (Hopkins), Best Actress (Foster), and Best Adapted Screenplay (Ted Tally), making it only the third film in history accomplish that feat. It was also nominated for Best Sound (Tom Fleischman and Christopher Newman) and Best Film Editing, but lost to Terminator 2: Judgment Day and JFK, respectively.[16]Other awards include best picture from the National Board of Review, CHI Awards and PEO Awards. Demme won the Silver Bear for Best Director at the 41st Berlin International Film Festival[17] and was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Director. The film was nominated for the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics. It was also nominated as best film by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) Awards. Screenwriter Ted Tally received an Edgar Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay. The film was awarded Best Horror Film of the Year during the 2nd Horror Hall of Fame telecast, with Vincent Price presenting the award to the film's executive producer Gary Goetzman.[18]In 1998, the film was listed as one of the 100 greatest movies in the past 100 years by the American Film Institute.[19] In 2006, at the Key Art Awards, the original poster for The Silence of the Lambs was named best film poster "of the past 35 years".[20]The Silence of the Lambs placed seventh on Bravo's 100 Scariest Movie Moments for Lecter's infamous escape scene. The American Film Institute named Hannibal Lecter (as portrayed by Hopkins) the number one film villain of all time[21] and Clarice Starling (as portrayed by Foster) the sixth greatest film hero of all time.[21]In 2011, ABC aired a primetime special, Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time that counted down the best movies chosen by fans based on results of a poll conducted by ABC and People Magazine. Silence of the Lambs was selected as the #1 Best Suspense/Thriller and Dr. Hannibal Lecter was selected as the #4 Greatest Film Character.Upon its release, The Silence of the Lambs was criticized by members of the LGBT community for its portrayal of Buffalo Bill as bisexual and transsexual. In response to the critiques, Demme replied that Buffalo Bill "wasn't a gay character. He was a tormented man who hated himself and wished he was a woman because that would have made him as far away from himself as he possibly could be." Demme added that he "came to realize that there is a tremendous absence of positive gay characters in movies."[22][23]In a 1992 interview with Playboy magazine, notable feminist and women's rights advocate Betty Friedan stated, "I thought it was absolutely outrageous that The Silence of the Lambs won four  [sic] Oscars. [...] I'm not saying that the movie shouldn't have been shown. I'm not denying the movie was an artistic triumph, but it was about the evisceration, the skinning alive of women. That is what I find offensive. Not the Playboy centerfold."[24]February 14, 1991(1991-02-14)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Casting
3.2 Filming

3.1 Casting3.2 Filming4 Release

4.1 Critical reception
4.2 Accolades

4.1 Critical reception4.2 Accolades5 Accusations of homophobia and sexism6 See also7 References8 External links3.1 Casting3.2 Filming4.1 Critical reception4.2 AccoladesJodie Foster as Clarice StarlingAnthony Hopkins as Dr. Hannibal LecterScott Glenn as Jack CrawfordTed Levine as Jame Gumb, "Buffalo Bill"Anthony Heald as Dr. Frederick ChiltonBrooke Smith as Catherine MartinDiane Baker as Senator Ruth MartinKasi Lemmons as Ardelia MappFrankie Faison as Barney MatthewsTracey Walter as LamarCharles Napier as Lt. BoyleDanny Darst as Sgt. TateAlex Coleman as Sgt. Jim PembryDan Butler as RodenPaul Lazar as PilcherRon Vawter as Paul KrendlerRoger Corman as FBI Director Hayden BurkeChris Isaak as SWAT CommanderHarry Northup as Mr. BimmelMasha Skorobogatov as Young Clarice StarlingDon Brockett as cellmate and "Pen Pal"AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  #65AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills  #5AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Hannibal Lecter  #1 Villain
Clarice Starling  #6 Hero
"Buffalo Bill" (Jame Gumb)  Nominated Villain

Hannibal Lecter  #1 VillainClarice Starling  #6 Hero"Buffalo Bill" (Jame Gumb)  Nominated VillainAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"A census taker once tried to test me. I ate his liver with some fava beans and a nice Chianti."  #21
"I do wish we could chat longer, but I'm having an old friend for dinner."  Nominated

"A census taker once tried to test me. I ate his liver with some fava beans and a nice Chianti."  #21"I do wish we could chat longer, but I'm having an old friend for dinner."  NominatedAFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #74Hannibal Lecter  #1 VillainClarice Starling  #6 Hero"Buffalo Bill" (Jame Gumb)  Nominated Villain"A census taker once tried to test me. I ate his liver with some fava beans and a nice Chianti."  #21"I do wish we could chat longer, but I'm having an old friend for dinner."  NominatedList of films based on crime booksThe Silence of the Lambs at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Silence of the Lambs at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Silence of the Lambs at AllRoviThe Silence of the Lambs at Box Office MojoThe Silence of the Lambs at Rotten TomatoesThe Silence of the Lambs at MetacriticThe Silence of the Lambs at Metro-Goldwyn-MayerCriterion Collection essay by Amy TaubinNetwork is a 1976 American satirical film released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and United Artists about a fictional television network, UBS, and its struggle with poor ratings. The film was written by Paddy Chayefsky and directed by Sidney Lumet. It stars Faye Dunaway, William Holden, Peter Finch and Robert Duvall and features Wesley Addy, Ned Beatty, and Beatrice Straight.The film won four Academy Awards, in the categories of Best Actor (Finch), Best Actress (Dunaway), Best Supporting Actress (Straight), and Best Original Screenplay (Chayefsky).In 2000, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 2002, it was inducted into the Producers Guild of America Hall of Fame as a film that has "set an enduring standard for U.S. American entertainment".[2] In 2006, Chayefsky's script was voted one of the top-ten screenplays by the Writers Guild of America, East. In 2007, the film was 64th among the 100 greatest American films as chosen by the American Film Institute, a ranking slightly higher than the one AFI had given it ten years earlier.Howard Beale (Peter Finch), the longtime anchor of the Union Broadcasting System's UBS Evening News, learns from the news division president Max Schumacher (William Holden) that he has just two more weeks on the air because of declining ratings. The two old friends get roaring drunk and lament the state of their industry. The following night, Beale announces on live television that he will commit suicide on next Tuesday's broadcast.[3] UBS fires him after this incident, but Schumacher intervenes so that Beale can have a dignified farewell. Beale promises he will apologize for his outburst, but once on the air, he launches back into a rant claiming that life is "bullshit". Beale's outburst causes the newscast's ratings to spike, and much to Schumacher's dismay, the upper echelons of UBS decide to exploit Beale's antics rather than pull him off the air. In one impassioned diatribe, Beale galvanizes the nation, persuading his viewers to shout out of their windows "I'm as mad as hell, and I'm not going to take this anymore!".Diana Christensen (Faye Dunaway) heads the network's programming department; seeking just one hit show, she cuts a deal with a band of radical terrorists (a parody of the Symbionese Liberation Army called the "Ecumenical Liberation Army") for a new docudrama series called the Mao-Tse Tung Hour for the upcoming fall season. When Beale's ratings seem to have topped out, Christensen approaches Schumacher and offers to help him "develop" the news show. He says no to the professional offer, but not to the personal one, and the two begin an affair. When Schumacher decides to end the "Howard as Angry Man" format, Christensen convinces her boss, Frank Hackett (Robert Duvall), to slot the evening news show under the entertainment division so that she can develop it. Hackett agrees, bullies the UBS executives to consent, and fires Schumacher at the same time. Soon after, Beale is hosting a new program called The Howard Beale Show, top-billed as "the mad prophet of the airwaves". Ultimately, the show becomes the most highly rated program on television, and Beale finds new celebrity preaching his angry message in front of a live studio audience that, on cue, chants Beale's signature catchphrase en masse: "We're as mad as hell, and we're not going to take this anymore." At first, Max's and Diana's romance withers as the show flourishes, but in the flush of high ratings, the two ultimately find their ways back together, and Schumacher leaves his wife of over 25 years for Christensen. But Christensen's fanatical devotion to her job and emotional emptiness ultimately drive Max back to his wife, and he warns his former lover that she will self-destruct at the pace she is running with her career. "You are television incarnate, Diana," he tells her, "indifferent to suffering, insensitive to joy. All of life is reduced to the common rubble of banality."When Beale discovers that Communications Company of America (CCA), the conglomerate that owns UBS, will be bought out by an even larger Saudi Arabian conglomerate, he launches an on-screen tirade against the deal, encouraging viewers to send telegrams to the White House telling them, "I want the CCA deal stopped now!" This throws the top network brass into a state of panic because the company's debt load has made merger essential for survival. Hackett takes Beale to meet with CCA chairman Arthur Jensen (Ned Beatty), who explicates his own "corporate cosmology" to the attentive Beale. Jensen delivers a tirade of his own in an "appropriate setting," the dramatically darkened CCA boardroom, that suggests to the docile Beale that Jensen may himself be some higher power  describing the interrelatedness of the participants in the international economy, and the illusory nature of nationality distinctions. Jensen persuades Beale to abandon the populist messages and preach his new "evangel". But television audiences find his new sermons on the dehumanization of society to be depressing, and ratings begin to slide, yet Jensen will not allow UBS executives to fire Beale. Seeing its two-for-the-price-of-one value  solving the Beale problem plus sparking a boost in season-opener ratings  Christensen, Hackett, and the other executives decide to hire the Ecumenical Liberation Army to assassinate Beale on the air; the assassination succeeds, putting an end to The Howard Beale Show and kicking off a second season of The Mao-Tse Tung Hour.The film ends with the narrator stating:This was the story of Howard Beale, the first known instance of a man who was killed because he had lousy ratings.Part of the inspiration for Chayefsky's script came from the on-air suicide of television news reporter Christine Chubbuck in Sarasota, Florida two years earlier.[6] The anchorwoman was suffering from depression and battles with her editors, and unable to keep going, she shot herself on camera as stunned viewers watched on July 15, 1974. Chayefsky used the incident to set up his film's focal point. As he would say later in an interview, "Television will do anything for a rating... anything!"The character of network executive Diana Christiansen was based on NBC daytime television programming executive Lin Bolen,[7] which Bolen disputed.[8]Chayefsky and producer Howard Gottfried had just come off a lawsuit against United Artists, challenging the studio's right to lease their previous film, The Hospital, to ABC in a package with a less successful film. Despite this recent lawsuit, Chayefsky and Gottfried signed a deal with UA to finance Network, until UA found the subject matter too controversial and backed out.Undeterred, Chayefsky and Gottfried shopped the script around to other studios, and eventually found an interested party in MGM. Soon afterward, UA reversed itself and looked to co-finance the film with MGM, which for the past several years had distributed through UA in the US. MGM agreed to let UA back on board, and gave it the international distribution rights, with MGM controlling North American/Caribbean rights.The film premiered in New York City on November 27, 1976, and went into wide release shortly afterward.The film became one of the big hits of 1976-1977 and got big receipts and reviews. Vincent Canby, in his November 1976 review of the film for The New York Times, called the film "outrageous...brilliantly, cruelly funny, a topical American comedy that confirms Paddy Chayefsky's position as a major new American satirist" and a film whose "wickedly distorted views of the way television looks, sounds, and, indeed, is, are the satirist's cardiogram of the hidden heart, not just of television but also of the society that supports it and is, in turn, supported."[9]In a review of the film written after it received its Academy Awards, Roger Ebert called it a "supremely well-acted, intelligent film that tries for too much, that attacks not only television but also most of the other ills of the 1970s," though "what it does accomplish is done so well, is seen so sharply, is presented so unforgivingly, that Network will outlive a lot of tidier movies."[10] Seen a quarter-century later, Ebert added the film to his "Great Movies" list and said the film was "like prophecy. When Chayefsky created Howard Beale, could he have imagined Jerry Springer, Howard Stern, and the World Wrestling Federation?"; he credits Lumet and Chayefsky for knowing "just when to pull out all the stops."[11] The film also ranks at number 100 in Empire magazines list of the 500 Greatest Films of All Time.[12]Not all reviews were positive: Pauline Kael in The New Yorker, in a review subtitled "Hot Air", criticized the film's abundance of long, preachy speeches; Chayefsky's self-righteous contempt for not only television itself but also television viewers; and the fact that almost everyone in the movie, particularly Robert Duvall, has a screaming rant: "The cast of this messianic farce takes turns yelling at us soulless masses."[13] Michael Billington wrote, "Too much of this film has the hectoring stridency of tabloid headlines",[14] while Chris Petit in Time Out described it as "slick, 'adult', self-congratulatory, and almost entirely hollow", adding that "most of the interest comes in watching such a lavishly mounted vehicle leaving the rails so spectacularly."[15]Network won three of the four acting awards. As of 2011, Network is the last film to have won three of the four Academy Awards for acting.Finch died before the 1977 Academy Awards ceremony and was the only performer to win a posthumous Academy Award until Heath Ledger won a Best Supporting Actor Oscar in 2009. The statuette itself was collected by Finch's widow, Eletha Finch.Straight's performance as Louise Schumacher occupied only five minutes and 40 seconds of screen time, making it the shortest performance to win an Oscar, as of 2012.[16]The feature film was a co-production between MGM and United Artists;[17] the latter distributor owned worldwide theatrical distribution rights. Both companies also shared the film's copyright.[18]In 1980, UA's then-parent, Transamerica Corporation, put the studio up for sale following the disastrous release of Heaven's Gate, which had been a major financial drain and public relations embarrassment. The next year, MGM purchased UA, and consequently gained UA's share of Network. UA's international operations were merged into MGM's share of Cinema International Corporation (the joint venture MGM was a partner since 1974 with Paramount Pictures and Universal Pictures), eventually becoming United International Pictures. The film was released to MGM/CBS Home Video in the United States as part of the original 24-title VHS/Betamax package in October 1980. Home video rights for the film outside the U.S. went to Warner Home Video, as UA distributed the film because it was a co-production.Then, in 1986, media mogul Ted Turner purchased MGM/UA. Without any financial backers, Turner soon fell into debt and sold back most of MGM, but kept the library for his own company, Turner Entertainment. This included the US distribution rights to Network, but international distribution remained with MGM (with theatrical distribution by UIP), which retained UA's library from 1952 on. Home video rights outside the U.S. were still with WHV due to their deal with UA. Turner soon made a deal with MGM's video division for home distribution of most of Turner's library, allowing MGM to retain US video rights to Network for 13 more years. Home video rights to the MGM and UA titles were moved to Warner Home Video in 1990, using the MGM/UA Home Video label under license.In 1996, Turner merged with Time Warner. Consequently, Warner Bros. assumed television and theatrical distribution rights to the Turner library, with video rights being added in 1999. The post-1952 UA library and the post-4/1986 MGM were assumed by themselves through MGM Home Entertainment after their worldwide deal with Warner Home Video expired in 2000.Both Turner and MGM now share the film's copyright.[18] As of 2011, Warner Bros./Turner owns the US and worldwide television distribution rights to Network, while international distribution rights remain with MGM. MGM has assigned international video distribution rights to 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment, while international theatrical rights are co-held by Columbia Pictures (previously held by 20th Century Fox and UIP).The film's noted line "I'm as mad as hell, and I'm not going to take this anymore" and its derivatives are referenced in numerous films and other media.The short-lived series Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip mentions the film and its writer Paddy Chayefsky multiple times after a character's outburst on live television. The show's creator Aaron Sorkin also mentioned the film and Chayefsky during his acceptance speech after winning the Academy Award for writing the film The Social Network.NotesBest Actress and Best Supporting ActressNovember 27, 1976(1976-11-27)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Critical reception5 Awards and honors

5.1 Academy Awards
5.2 Golden Globes
5.3 BAFTA Awards
5.4 American Film Institute

5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Golden Globes5.3 BAFTA Awards5.4 American Film Institute6 Rights7 In popular culture8 References9 External links5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Golden Globes5.3 BAFTA Awards5.4 American Film InstituteFaye Dunaway as Diana ChristensenWilliam Holden as Max SchumacherPeter Finch as Howard BealeRobert Duvall as Frank HackettWesley Addy as Nelson ChaneyNed Beatty as Arthur JensenBeatrice Straight as Louise Schumacher Jordan Charney as Harry HunterLane Smith as Robert McDonoughMarlene Warfield as Laureen HobbsConchata Ferrell as Barbara SchlesingerCarolyn Krigbaum as Max's secretaryArthur Burghardt as the Great Ahmet KhanCindy Grover as Caroline SchumacherDarryl Hickman as Bill HerronLee Richardson as Narrator (voice)Kathy Cronkite (Walter Cronkite's daughter) appears as kidnapped heiress, Mary Ann GiffordLance Henriksen has a small uncredited role as a network lawyer at Ahmet Khan's homeKen Kercheval makes an appearance as Laureen Hobbs' attorney.Some sources indicate that Tim Robbins has a small, non-speaking role at the end of the film as one of the assassins who kills Beale;[4] however, Robbins has publicly stated that he did not appear in the film.[5]Best Actor  Peter FinchBest Actress  Faye DunawayBest Supporting Actress  Beatrice StraightBest Writing, Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen  Paddy ChayefskyBest Actor  William HoldenBest Supporting Actor  Ned BeattyBest Cinematography  Owen RoizmanBest Film Editing  Alan HeimBest Director  Sidney LumetBest PictureBest Actor in a Motion Picture - Drama - Peter FinchBest Actress in a Motion Picture - Drama - Faye DunawayBest Director - Sidney LumetBest Screenplay - Paddy ChayefskyBest Motion Picture - DramaBest Actor - Peter FinchBest FilmBest Direction - Sidney LumetBest Actor - William HoldenBest Actress - Faye DunawayBest Supporting Actor - Robert DuvallBest Screenplay - Paddy ChayefskyBest Editing - Alan HeimBest Sound - Jack Fitzstephens, Marc Laub, Sanford Rackow, James Sabat, and Dick VorisekAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - #66AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs - NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes & Villains:

Diana Christensen - Nominated Villain

Diana Christensen - Nominated VillainAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"I'm as mad as hell, and I'm not going to take this anymore!" - #19

"I'm as mad as hell, and I'm not going to take this anymore!" - #19AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #64Diana Christensen - Nominated Villain"I'm as mad as hell, and I'm not going to take this anymore!" - #19Network at the Internet Movie DatabaseNetwork at the TCM Movie DatabaseNetwork at AllRoviNetwork at Box Office MojoThe Manchurian Candidate is a 1962 American Cold War suspense thriller film directed by John Frankenheimer from a screenplay by George Axelrod based on Richard Condon's 1959 novel. It stars Frank Sinatra, Laurence Harvey and Janet Leigh and features Angela Lansbury, Henry Silva, and James Gregory.The central concept of the film is that the son of a prominent, right-wing political family has been brainwashed as an unwitting assassin for an international Communist conspiracy. The Manchurian Candidate was nationally released on Wednesday, October 24, 1962, at the height of the Cuban Missile Crisis. The film was critically acclaimed, and was nominated for two Academy Awards.During the Korean War, the Soviets capture an American platoon and take them to Manchuria in Communist China. After the war, the soldiers return to the United States, and Staff Sergeant Raymond Shaw (Laurence Harvey) is credited with saving their lives in combat. Upon the recommendation of the platoon's commander, Captain Bennett Marco (Frank Sinatra), Shaw is awarded the Medal of Honor for his supposed actions. When asked to describe him, Marco and the other soldiers automatically respond, "Raymond Shaw is the kindest, bravest, warmest, most wonderful human being I've ever known in my life." Deep down, however, they know that Shaw is a cold, sad, unsociable loner.Marco  who has since been promoted to Major  suffers from a recurring nightmare in which a hypnotized Shaw kills two fellow soldiers before the assembled military brass of communist nations, during a practical demonstration of a brainwashing technique. Marco wants to investigate, but receives no support from Army Intelligence as he has no proof. However, Marco learns that another soldier from the platoon, Allen Melvin (James Edwards), has had the same nightmare. When Melvin and Marco separately identify some of the men in the dream as leading figures in communist governments, Army Intelligence agrees to help Marco investigate.Meanwhile, Shaw's mother, Mrs. Eleanor Iselin (Angela Lansbury), drives the political career of her husband and Shaw's stepfather, Senator John Yerkes Iselin (James Gregory), a McCarthy-like demagogue who is widely dismissed as a fool. Senator Iselin finds a newfound political profile when he claims that an undetermined number of Communists work within the Defense Department. However, unknown to Raymond, Mrs. Iselin is actually a Communist agent with a plan intended to secure the presidency under Communist influence.Mrs. Iselin is the American "operator" responsible for controlling Raymond, who was conditioned in Manchuria to be an unwitting assassin whose actions are triggered by a Queen of Diamonds playing card. When he sees it, he will obey the next suggestion or order given to him. When given instructions to kill selected targets, he must also kill any witnesses and never remember his actions, making him the perfect assassin. It is revealed that Shaw's heroism was a false memory implanted in the platoon by the Communists in Manchuria, and that they were covertly returned to the American lines when their conditioning was completed; the actions for which Shaw was awarded his Medal of Honor never took place.Raymond briefly finds happiness when he rekindles a youthful romance with Jocelyn Jordan (Leslie Parrish), the daughter of Senator Thomas Jordan (John McGiver), one of his stepfather's political rivals. Raymond had previously courted Jocelyn in order to get back at his mother, but they then genuinely fell in love. Mrs. Iselin broke up the relationship for political reasons, but now facilitates the couple's reunion as part of her scheme to garner the support of Senator Jordan for her husband's own sudden bid for Vice President.Jocelyn, wearing a Queen of Diamonds costume outfit, inadvertently hypnotizes Raymond at a costume party thrown by the Iselins, and the couple elopes. Although pleased with the match, Senator Jordan makes it clear to Mrs. Iselin that he will move for her husband's impeachment if he makes any attempt to seek the vice-presidential nomination. Mrs. Iselin triggers Raymond's conditioning and sends him to assassinate Jordan. Raymond carries out his orders, and also kills Jocelyn when she happens upon the scene. Raymond has no knowledge of his actions, and is genuinely grief-stricken when he learns of the murders.Marco discovers the role of the Queen of Diamonds card in hypnotizing Raymond into committing murder. Marco meets Raymond and, using a deck composed entirely of such cards, gets the full story; he then orders Raymond to break the links between the card and obeying any further subsequent orders. Mrs. Iselin primes her son to assassinate their party's presidential candidate at the nomination convention so that Senator Iselin, as the vice-presidential candidate, will become the presidential candidate by default. This will cause mass hysteria that will get Iselin, "the Manchurian candidate", elected and justify emergency powers that, in Mrs. Iselin's words, "will make martial law seem like anarchy". Mrs. Iselin tells Raymond that she did not know that he was to be selected by the Communists, who apparently chose him to be the assassin because they believed it would solidify their own hold and control over her. She vows that once in power she will "grind them into the dirt".Marco's attempt to free Raymond appears to have failed. Raymond enters the convention hall disguised as a Catholic priest and takes up a position to carry out the assassination as he was instructed, using a rifle with a scope. Marco and his supervisor, Colonel Milt (Douglas Henderson), arrive at the convention to stop him. As the Presidential nominee (Robert Riordan) makes his speech, Raymond instead takes his revenge and saves the country by shooting his mother and stepfather dead. He then commits suicide in front of Marco while wearing his Medal of Honor.For the role of Mrs. Iselin, Sinatra had considered Lucille Ball, but Frankenheimer, who had worked with Lansbury in All Fall Down, suggested her for the part[2] and insisted that Sinatra watch the film before making any decisions. (Although Lansbury played Raymond Shaw's mother, she was in fact only three years older than actor Laurence Harvey.)An early scene where Raymond, recently decorated with the Medal of Honor, argues with his parents was filmed in Sinatra's own private plane.[2]Janet Leigh plays Marco's love interest. A bizarre conversation on a train between her character and Marco has been interpreted by somenotably film critic Roger Ebert[3][4]as implying that Leigh's character, Eugenie Rose Chaney, is working for the Communists to activate Marco's brainwashing, much as the Queen of Diamonds activates Shaw's. It is a jarringly strange conversation between people who have only just met, and almost appears to be an exchange of passwords. Frankenheimer himself maintained that he had no idea whether or not "Rosie" was supposed to be an agent of any sort; he merely lifted the train conversation straight from the Condon novel, in which there is no such implication.[2] The rest of the film does not elaborate on Rosie's part and latter scenes suggest that she is simply a romantic foil for Marco.During the fight scene between Frank Sinatra and Henry Silva, Sinatra broke his hand during a movement where he smashed through a table. This resulted in problems with his hand/fingers for several years and is said to be one of the reasons why he pulled out of a starring role in Dirty Harry, having to undertake surgery to alleviate pains.The interrogation sequence where Raymond and Marco confront each other in the hotel room opposite the convention is from a rough cut. When first filmed Sinatra was out of focus and when they tried to re-shoot the scene he was simply not as effective as he had been in the first take (a common factor in Sinatra's film performances). Frustrated, Frankenheimer decided in the end to simply use the original out-of-focus takes. Critics praised him for showing Marco from Raymond's distorted point-of-view.[2]In the novel, Mrs. Iselin uses her son's brainwashing to have sex with him before the climax. Concerned that censors would not allow even a reference to such a taboo subject in a mainstream motion picture of the time, the filmmakers instead opted for Mrs. Iselin to simply kiss Raymond on the lips to imply her incestuous attraction to him.[2]For the scene in the convention hall prior to the assassination, Frankenheimer was at a loss as to how Marco would pinpoint Raymond Shaw's sniper's nest. Eventually he decided on a method similar to Alfred Hitchcock's Foreign Correspondent (1940). Frankenheimer noted that what would be plagiarism in the 1960s would now be looked upon as an homage.[2]Frankenheimer also acknowledged the climax's connection with Hitchcock's The Man Who Knew Too Much (1934 and 1956) by naming the Presidential candidate "Benjamin Arthur". Arthur Benjamin was the composer of the Storm Clouds Cantata used in both versions of Hitchcock's film.According to rumor, Sinatra removed the film from distribution after the John F. Kennedy assassination on November 22, 1963. Michael Schlesinger, who was responsible for the film's 1988 reissue by MGM/UA, denies the rumor. According to him, the film's apparent withdrawal was not due to the assassination, but due to lack of public interest by 1963. Sinatra's representatives acquired rights to the film in 1972 after the initial contract with United Artists expired, but he later stated that he was unaware of the transaction at the time. After a successful showing at the New York Film Festival in 1987 renewed public interest in the film, the studio reacquired the rights and it became again available for theater and video releases.[5][6]It has a 98% rating on the Rotten Tomatoes website, based on 49 reviews.[7] Film critic Roger Ebert ranked The Manchurian Candidate as an exemplary "Great Film", declaring that it is "inventive and frisky, takes enormous chances with the audience, and plays not like a 'classic' but as a work as alive and smart as when it was first released".[3]Angela Lansbury was nominated for an Academy Award as Best Supporting Actress, and Ferris Webster was nominated for Best Film Editing. In addition, Lansbury was named Best Supporting Actress by the National Board of Review and won the Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actress.The film was No. 67 on the AFI's "100 Years...100 Movies" when that list was compiled in 1998, but in 2007 a new version of that list was made which excluded The Manchurian Candidate. It was also No. 17 on AFI's "100 Years...100 Thrills" lists. In 1994, The Manchurian Candidate was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".[8]In April 2007, Angela Lansbury's character was selected by Newsweek as one of the ten greatest villains in cinema history.American Film Institute recognitionOn the DVD audio commentary of the film, the director stated his belief that it contained the first-ever karate fight in an American motion picture. This is true inasmuch as this was the first fight scene in an American film in which a karatekaa studied practitionerfaced off against a karateka; however, the 1955 MGM film Bad Day at Black Rock featured a fight scene between a conventional fighter, played by Ernest Borgnine, and a karate expert, played by Spencer Tracy.October 24, 1962(1962-10-24)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Releases5 Reception

5.1 Critical response
5.2 Awards and honors
5.3 Home media

5.1 Critical response5.2 Awards and honors5.3 Home media6 See also7 References8 External links5.1 Critical response5.2 Awards and honors5.3 Home mediaFrank Sinatra as Maj. Bennett MarcoLaurence Harvey as Raymond ShawAngela Lansbury as Mrs. IselinJanet Leigh as Eugenie Rose ChaneyJames Gregory as Sen. John Yerkes IselinHenry Silva as ChunjinLeslie Parrish as Jocelyn JordanJohn McGiver as Sen. Thomas JordanKhigh Dheigh as Dr. Yen LoJames Edwards as Cpl. Allen MelvinDouglas Henderson as Col. MiltAlbert Paulsen as ZilkovBarry Kelley as Secretary of DefenseLloyd Corrigan as Holborn GainesRobert Riordan as Benjamin K. ArthurAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #67AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Mrs. Iselin, villain #21

Mrs. Iselin, villain #21AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills #17Mrs. Iselin, villain #21Assassinations in fictionHypnosis in fictionConspiracy thrillerSpy filmThe Manchurian Candidate at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Manchurian Candidate at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Manchurian Candidate at AllRoviThe Manchurian Candidate at Rotten TomatoesThe Manchurian Candidate at MetacriticStoryline and key dialogue excerptsMcCarthyism and the MoviesWho's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? is a 1966 American drama film directed by Mike Nichols. The screenplay by Ernest Lehman is an adaptation of the play of the same title by Edward Albee. It stars Elizabeth Taylor as Martha and Richard Burton as George, with George Segal as Nick and Sandy Dennis as Honey.[1]The film was nominated for thirteen Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director for Mike Nichols, and is the only film to be nominated in every eligible category at the Academy Awards. All the four main actors of the film were nominated in their respective acting categories.The film won five awards, including a second Academy Award for Best Actress for Elizabeth Taylor and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for Sandy Dennis. However, the film lost to A Man for All Seasons for the Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor and Best Adapted Screenplay awards, and both Richard Burton and George Segal failed to win in their categories.Set on the campus of a small New England college, the film focuses on the volatile relationship of associate history professor George and his hard-drinking wife Martha, the daughter of the college president.It's 2:00 Sunday morning, and they have returned from one of her father's gatherings. Martha announces she has invited a young coupleNick, a young, good-looking, newly appointed instructor, and his mousey wife Honeyto join them for drinks. George is disturbed because she did so without consulting him first, prompting Martha to launch into the first of many loud and lengthy tirades during which she taunts and criticizes him. Knowing his wife is drunk and quite lewd, he asks her to behave herself when they arrive, and when the doorbell rings, he warns her to refrain from mentioning their child to their company.Overhearing Martha's crude retort as the door opens (which seems to be by design, since George baited Martha immediately before opening the door), Nick and Honey immediately feel ill at ease and quickly find themselves caught in the middle of a verbal war zone when their efforts to engage in small talk set off a volley of insults between their hosts. Martha begins to flirt lewdly with Nick while his meek wife tries to pretend she is unaware of what is happening.While Martha is showing Honey where the bathroom is, George tests Nick's verbal sparring skills, but the young man is no match for his host. Realizing he and his wife are becoming embroiled in the middle of marital warfare, he suggests they depart, but George cajoles him into staying.Upon returning to the living room alone, Honey innocently mentions to George she was unaware he and Martha had a son on the verge of celebrating his sixteenth birthday. Martha reappears in a new outfitform-fitting slacks and a revealing blouseand when her husband makes a snide remark about the ensemble, she begins to demean his abilities as a teacher, then escalates her seduction of Nick, complimenting him on the body he developed as both a quarterback and an intercollegiate state boxing champion while criticizing George's paunch. She informs their guests about a past incident when George refused to engage in a friendly outdoor boxing match with his father-in-law and Martha put on a pair of gloves and punched him in the jaw, knocking him into the bushes. As she relates the story, George aims a shotgun at the back of her head, causing Honey to scream. He pulls the trigger, which releases an umbrella, while he tells his wife she's dead.Honey again raises the subject of George and Martha's son, prompting the couple to engage in a conversation Martha quickly tries to end without success. To counterattack George's relentless comments about the boy, she tells their guests her husband is unsure the child is his own, although he most assuredly is. They argue about the color of the boy's eyes until George threatens to expose the truth about the boy. Furious, Martha accuses him of being a failure whose youthful, idealistic plans for the future slowly deteriorated as he came to realize he wasn't aggressive enough to follow in his father-in-law's footsteps, leaving her stuck with a flop. George cuts the diatribe short, first by smashing a bottle of gin against the fireplace mantle, and then by spinning Honey around and mockingly singing, "Who's afraid of Virginia Woolf?", a joke Martha had made herself during the party earlier that evening.Inebriated and on the verge of throwing up from George's spinning, Honey rushes from the room. Martha goes to the kitchen to make coffee, and George and Nick go outside. The younger man confesses he was attracted to Honey more for her family's money than passion, and married her only because she mistakenly believed she was pregnant. George describes his own marriage as one of never-ending accommodation and adjustment, then admits he considers Nick a threat. George also tells a story about a boy he grew up with. This boy had accidentally killed his mother. Years later, George claims the boy was driving with his father. He swerved to "miss a porcupine" in the road, and the resulting accident killed his father. The boy ended up living out his days in a mental hospital.When their guests propose leaving, George insists on driving them home. In the car, the talk returns to George and Martha's son. They approach a roadhouse, and Honey suggests they stop to dance. While Honey and George watch, Nick suggestively dances with Martha, who continues to mock George and criticize his inadequacies. George unplugs the jukebox and announces the game is over. In response, Martha alludes to the fact he may have murdered his parents like the protagonist in his unpublished, non-fiction novel, prompting George to strangle Martha until Nick manages to pull him away from her.George persuades the owner to serve them one more round before closing and suggests that, having played a game of Humiliate the Host, the quartet should now engage in Hump the Hostess or Get the Guests. He then tells the group about a second novel he allegedly has written about a young couple from the Midwest, a good-looking teacher and his timid wife, who marry because of her hysterical pregnancy and then settle in a small college town. An embarrassed Honey realizes Nick indiscreetly told George about their past and runs from the room. Nick promises revenge on George, and then runs after Honey.In the parking lot, George tells his wife he cannot stand the way she constantly humiliates him, and she tauntingly accuses him of having married her for just that reason. Their rage erupts into a declaration of "total war". Martha drives off, retrieving Nick and Honey, leaving George to makes his way back home on foot. When he arrives home, he discovers Honey nearly delirious and realizes that his wife and Nick are presently engaged in a sexual encounter. Through Honey's drunken babbling, George begins to suspect that her pregnancy was in fact real, and that she secretly had an abortion. He then devises a plan to get back at Martha.When Martha accuses Nick of being sexually inadequate, he blames his impotency on all the liquor he has consumed. George then appears and requests that everyone gather once more for one last game. He mentions his and Martha's son, prompting her to reminisce about his birth and childhood and how he was nearly destroyed by his father. George accuses Martha of engaging in destructive and abusive behavior with the boy, who frequently ran away to escape her sexual advances. George then announces he has received a telegram with bad newsthe boy was killed the previous afternoon on a country road when he swerved to avoid hitting a porcupine and crashed into a tree.As Martha argues with George that he "can't do this" and begs him not to "kill" their son, Nick suddenly realizes the truthMartha and George had never been able to have a baby, for reasons that are unexplained. Instead, their game together is to imagine they have a son and invent situations and stories of him. By declaring their son dead, accordingly, George has "killed" him. (There are hints of this throughout the script that become clear in retrospectfor example, when George and Nick were sitting by the swing waiting for Honey to finish throwing up, George comments quietly that Martha never had any pregnancies.)The young couple departs quietly, and George and Martha are left alone as the day begins to break outside. They speak quietly, and in the last lines Martha answers the title question with "I am, George, I am."The film adaptation differs slightly from the play, which has only four characters. The minor characters of the roadhouse owner, who has only a few lines of dialogue, and his wife, who serves a tray of drinks and leaves silently, were played by the film's gaffer, Frank Flanagan, and his wife Agnes.The play is set entirely in Martha and George's house. In the film, one scene takes place at the roadhouse, one in George and Martha's yard, and one in their car. Despite these minor deviations, however, the film is extremely faithful to the play. The filmmakers used the original play as the screenplay and, aside from toning down some of the profanity slightly  Martha's "Screw you!" (which, in the 2005 Broadway revival, is "Fuck you!") becomes "God damn you!"  virtually all of the original dialogue remains intact. (In the version released in the UK, "Screw you" is kept intact. In an interview at the time of the release, Taylor referred to this phrase as pushing boundaries.)The film was shot on location at Smith College, Northampton, Massachusetts. Nichols insisted on this for verisimilitude, but later stated that he had been misguided, that it added nothing artistically, and that the film could as well have been shot on any sound stage.Nick is never referred to or addressed by name during the film.The choice of Elizabeth Taylorat the time regarded as one of the most beautiful women in the worldto play the frumpy, fifty-ish Martha surprised many, but the actress gained 30 pounds (13.5kg) for the role and her performance (along with those of Burton, Segal and Dennis) was ultimately praised. When Jack Warner approached Albee about buying the film rights for the play, he told Albee that he wanted to cast Bette Davis and James Mason in the roles of Martha and George.[2] In the script, Martha references Davis and quotes her famous "What a dump!" line from the film Beyond the Forest (1949). Playwright Edward Albee was delighted by this cast, believing that "James Mason seemed absolutely right...and to watch Bette Davis do that Bette Davis imitation in that first scenethat would have been so wonderful."[2] However, fearing that the talky, character-driven story would land with a resounding thudand that audiences would grow weary of watching two hours of screaming between a harridan and a wimpNichols and Lehman cast stars Elizabeth Taylor and Richard Burton.[3] Edward Albee was surprised by the casting decision, but later stated that Taylor was quite good, and Burton was incredible. In the end though, he still felt that "with Mason and Davis you would have had a less flashy and ultimately deeper film."[2]Edward Albee's 1962 play was replete with dialogue that included multiple instances of "goddamn" and "son-of-a-bitch", along with "screw you", "up yours", "great nipples", and "hump the hostess".[4] Opening on Broadway during the Cuban Missile Crisis, audiences who had gone to the theater to forget the threat of nuclear war were instead assaulted by language and situations they had not seen before outside of experimental theater.[5]The immediate reaction of the theater audiences, eventually voiced by critics, was that Albee had created a play that would be a great success on Broadway, but could never be filmed in anything like its current form. Neither the audience nor the critics understood how much the Hollywood landscape was changing in the 1960s, and that it could no longer live with any meaningful Production Code.[6] In bringing the play to the screen, Ernest Lehman decided he would not change the dialogue that had shocked veteran theatergoers in New York only four years earlier. Despite serious opposition to this decision, Lehman prevailed.[3]As filming began, the Catholic Legion of Motion Pictures (formerly the Catholic Legion of Decency), issued a preliminary report that, if what they heard was true, they might have to slap Virginia Woolf with the once-dreaded "condemned" rating, although they promised to wait to see the film. The Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) followed with an even stronger statement, warning the studiowithout promising to wait for a screeningthat if they were really thinking of leaving the Broadway play's language intact, they could forget about getting a Seal of Approval.[4]Warner Brothers studio executives sat down to look at a rough cut, without music, and a Life magazine reporter was present. He printed the following quote from one of the studio chiefs: "My God! We've got a seven million dollar dirty movie on our hands!"[4]The film was considered groundbreaking for having a level of profanity and sexual implication unheard of at that time. Jack Valenti, who had just become president of the MPAA in 1966, had abolished the old Production Code. In order for the film to be released with MPAA approval, Warner Bros. agreed to minor deletions of certain profanities and to have a special warning placed on all advertisements for the film, indicating adult content. Even the Catholic Office refused to "condemn" the film.[4] It was this film and another groundbreaking film, Michelangelo Antonioni's Blow-Up (1966), that led Jack Valenti to begin work on the MPAA film rating system that went into effect on November 1, 1968. It is also said that Jack Warner chose to pay a fine of $5,000 in order to remain as faithful to the play (with its profanity) as possible.At the time of the release of the film, it was given a "Deluxe Edition Two-Record Set" soundtrack album release by Warner Brothers Records, a gatefold two-LP record set which included the entire film's dialogue. It was one of the only cases in which a film studio released an album of a film's vocals in its entirety, as the film (at that time) could never be shown in reruns on network television. The only piece of music heard throughout the entire album is a song titled "Virginia Woolf Rock" that plays while Martha and Nick are dancing (but plays a little differently than it does in the film).In at least two instances alternate takes were used: Taylor's memorable "Goddamn you!" line is altered to "Screw you!", and some of the dialogue from the dancing sequence was lifted from another take. As Martha tells her story about punching George in the stomach in front of her father to Nick and Honey, it is heard very clearly while in the film it became distant and muffled as the camera followed George into another room to get a gun. The album also ran a half-hour shorter than the movie as most pauses and long silent moments were removed. However, virtually every line remains intact.The album's cover has the four main actors on the cover and the back cover has some background information about the four actors, information about the five month shooting schedule, some information about Albee and a brief synopsis of the film. This album is out of print, was never re-released in any other formats, and is extremely rare and hard to find and is highly prized among collectors in almost any condition.The music from the film was issued as a single-LP release that featured 11 tracks of film composer Alex North's score from the film. The album also added snippets of dialog on a couple tracks, especially using Elizabeth Taylor shouting "SNAP!". This album was bootlegged unofficially onto an undated German CD and issued on CD by DRG in 2006.This is the only film to be nominated in every eligible category at the Academy Awards. Each of the four actors was nominated for an Oscar but only Elizabeth Taylor and Sandy Dennis won, for Best Actress and Supporting Actress, respectively. The film also won the Black and White Cinematography award for Haskell Wexler's stark, black-and-white camera work (it was the last film to win before the category was eliminated) and for Best Art Direction (Richard Sylbert, George James Hopkins).[7] It was the first film to have its entire credited cast be nominated for acting Oscars, a feat only accomplished twice more with Sleuth in 1972 and Give 'em Hell, Harry! in 1975.The film received the BAFTA Award for Best Film from any Source.In AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition), Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? ranked #67.The film is available in 2-disc special edition in North America (Region 1). This edition was concurrently released across much of Europe.June 22, 1966(1966-06-22)1 Plot summary2 Cast3 Production4 Casting5 Language and content controversy6 Deluxe Edition Two-LP Original Film Soundtrack Album7 Awards and acclaim8 Academy Awards9 Parodies10 DVD release11 References12 External linksElizabeth Taylor as MarthaRichard Burton as GeorgeGeorge Segal as NickSandy Dennis as HoneyMad Magazine published a spoof of the movie, entitled Who in Heck is Virginia Woolf?! At one point, it is remarked "This is an art film, so the censors have to let us talk dirty!" Most of the swearing is replaced with dingbats: when Martha asks George "%$?" and he replies "What kind of profanity is that, Liz?!", she says "I was just asking what percentage of the gross we're getting!" Their son turns out to be real, and to George and Martha's dismay, a clean-cut non-dysfunctional bore, in keeping with Mad's tradition of altering the endings of the movies that they parody.The film was spoofed on The Benny Hill Show, Season 7, Episode 4, "Sale of the Half Century" originally aired 21 April 1976, with Hill playing both Burton's and Taylor's parts. This was made by a parody how widescreen-movies were transferred to videotapes by Pan and scan -cropping.In the American Dad episode "Camp Refoogee", Roger and Francine's role-playing as a married couple is essentially taken from the original play by Edward Albee. It should also be noted that all four characters are wearing clothes that match the film, and the other couple resembles Segal and Dennis.The 1989 dance club hit remake of "Tainted Love" by the studio group Impedance was remixed by J.R. Clements for the Art of Compilation white label D.J. series. Clements' remix is entitled "The Raging George & Martha Mix," and incorporates some of the argumentative dialogue from the film into the remix."Never Mix, Never Worry" is a 2009 pop/rock song by The Sour Notes that is themed and titled after the film.In the 3rd Rock from the Sun episode "Dick in Law," Mary's squabbling parents are named George and Martha, which is most likely a subtle reference to the film.Tim Dirks (2008). "Review: Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (1966)". Filmsite.org. http://www.filmsite.org/whos.html. Retrieved 2008-06-21.Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? at the Internet Movie DatabaseWho's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? at AllRoviWho's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? at the TCM Movie DatabaseAn American in Paris is a 1951 MGM musical film inspired by the 1928 orchestral composition by George Gershwin. Starring Gene Kelly, Leslie Caron, Oscar Levant, Georges Guetary, and Nina Foch, the film is set in Paris, and was directed by Vincente Minnelli from a script by Alan Jay Lerner. The music is by George Gershwin, with lyrics by his brother Ira, with additional music by Saul Chaplin, the music director.The story of the film is interspersed with dance numbers choreographed by Gene Kelly and set to Gershwin's music. Songs and music include "I Got Rhythm", "I'll Build A Stairway to Paradise", "'S Wonderful", and "Our Love is Here to Stay". The climax of the film is "The American in Paris" ballet, a 16 minute dance featuring Kelly and Caron set to Gershwin's An American in Paris. The ballet alone cost more than $500,000.[citation needed]Jerry Mulligan (Gene Kelly), an American World War II veteran, is now an exuberant expatriate in Paris trying to make a reputation as a painter. His friend, Adam (Oscar Levant), is a struggling concert pianist who is a longtime associate of a French singer, Henri Baurel (Georges Gutary). A lonely society woman, Milo Roberts (Nina Foch), takes Jerry under her wing and supports him, but is more interested in Jerry than his art. Jerry remains oblivious to her feelings and falls in love with Lise (Leslie Caron), a French girl he meets at a restaurant. Lise loves him as well but she is already in a relationship with Henri, to whom she feels indebted for keeping her safe during World War II. For most of the film Jerry is unaware of Lise's relationship with Henri.Eventually Jerry learns that Lise is in love with him but is marrying Henri the next day. He invites Milo to a masked ball that night. At the raucous masked ball, with everyone in black-and-white costumes, Milo learns from Adam that Jerry is not interested in her, and Henri overhears Jerry and Lise saying goodbye to each other. When Henri and Lise drive away, Jerry daydreams about being with her all over Paris to the tune of the George Gershwin composition An American in Paris. His reverie is broken by a car horn, the sound of Henri bringing Lise back to him. They embrace as the Gershwin composition (and the film) ends.Cast notesThe film was shot in Hollywood, so it features some quirks in the occasional French dialogue. Notably, near the beginning of the I Got Rhythm number, one of the French children says Jerry, parle anglais  nous, which sounds rather curious, containing mistakes both in direct object placement and in respectful address. In the French soundtrack, which switches to the original sound for the duration of the songs, the  nous is masked through a plop sound, to make the sentence more palatable.Hollywood movies set in France seldom used location shooting or native speakers. However, great care was sometimes put into reproducing Paris surroundings, as in An American in Paris or Irma La Douce. Many French Paris-set movies of this era avoided location work too, and sometimes the same art directors (Alexandre Trauner being the best known example) worked on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean.WinsNominationsWinsNominationsGene Kelly received an Academy Honorary Award that year for "his versatility as an actor, singer, director and dancer, and specifically for his brilliant achievements in the art of choreography on film." It was his only Oscar.The film was entered into the 1952 Cannes Film Festival.[2]In 1993, An American in Paris was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".American Film Institute recognitionAFI also honored star Gene Kelly as #15 of the top 25 American male screen legends.A stage version of the musical was adapted by Ken Ludwig, and began previews at the Alley Theatre (Houston) on April 29, 2008, officially opening on May 18 and running through June 22. The production, directed by Alley artistic director Gregory Boyd with choreography by Randy Skinner, stars Harry Groener and Kerry O'Malley. The musical has many of the film's original songs, and also incorporates other Gershwin songs, such as "They All Laughed", "Let's Call the Whole Thing Off", and "Love Walked In".[3][4]November 11, 1951(1951-11-11)1 Plot2 Cast3 Music and dance4 Production5 Awards and honors

5.1 Academy Awards
5.2 Golden Globes
5.3 Others

5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Golden Globes5.3 Others6 Stage adaptation7 References8 External links5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Golden Globes5.3 OthersGene Kelly as Jerry MulliganLeslie Caron as Lise BouvierOscar Levant as Adam CookGeorges Gutary as Henri "Hank" BaurelNina Foch as Milo RobertsHayden Rorke, best known for playing Dr. Bellows on the TV series I Dream of Jeannie, has a small part as a friend of Nina Foch's character.Noel Neill, later to portray Lois Lane on the TV series The Adventures of Superman, has a small role as an American art student who tries to criticize Jerry Mulligan's paintings.Judy Landon, better known for her appearance in Kelly's next musical Singin' in the Rain (and as the wife of Brian Keith), appears as a dancer in the Stairway to Paradise sequence."Embraceable You" (Leslie Caron)"Nice Work If You Can Get It" (Georges Gutary)"By Strauss" (Gene Kelly, Gutary, Oscar Levant)"I Got Rhythm" (Kelly)"Tra-la-la (This Time It's Really Love)" (Kelly and Levant)"Our Love Is Here to Stay" (Kelly and Caron)"I'll Build a Stairway to Paradise" (Georges Gutary)"Concerto in F for Piano and Orchestra" (Levant and The MGM Symphony Orchestra)"'S Wonderful" (Kelly and Gutary)"An American in Paris Ballet" (Kelly, Caron, and ensemble)Academy Award for Best Picture: Arthur Freed, producerAcademy Award for Best Art  Set Decoration, Color: E. Preston Ames, Cedric Gibbons, F. Keogh Gleason, and Edwin B. WillisAcademy Award for Best Cinematography, Color: John Alton and Alfred GilksAcademy Award for Best Costume Design, Color: Orry-Kelly, Walter Plunkett, and Irene SharaffAcademy Award for Best Musical Score: Saul Chaplin and Johnny GreenAcademy Award for Best Writing, Scoring and Screenplay: Alan Jay LernerAcademy Award for Best Director: Vincente MinnelliAcademy Award for Best Film Editing: Adrienne FazanGolden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  Musical or ComedyGolden Globe Award for Best Director  Motion Picture: Vincente MinnelliGolden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture Musical or Comedy: Gene Kelly1998: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  #682002: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions  #392004: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs  #32

I Got Rhythm

I Got Rhythm2006: AFI's Greatest Movie Musicals  #9I Got RhythmAn American in Paris (film) at the Internet Movie DatabaseAn American in Paris (film) at the TCM Movie DatabaseAn American in Paris (film) at AllRoviAn American in Paris (film) at Rotten TomatoesFilmsite.org's Greatest Films An American in ParisCombustible Celluloid's review of An American in ParisShane is a 1953 American Western film from Paramount.[2][3] It was produced and directed by George Stevens from a screenplay by A. B. Guthrie, Jr., based on the 1949 novel of the same name by Jack Schaefer. Its Oscar-winning cinematography was by Loyal Griggs. The film stars Alan Ladd, Jean Arthur (in her last film after a thirty-year career) and Van Heflin, and features Brandon deWilde, Elisha Cook, Jr., Jack Palance and Ben Johnson.Shane was listed #45 in the 2007 edition of AFI's 100 Years100 Movies list and #3 on AFI's 10 Top 10 in the category Western.A stranger, wearing buckskin and a six shooter, calling himself Shane (Alan Ladd), rides into an isolated valley in the sparsely settled territory of Wyoming. Whatever his past, he's obviously skilled as a gunslinger, and soon finds himself drawn into a conflict between homesteader Joe Starrett (Van Heflin) and ruthless cattle baron Rufus Ryker (Emile Meyer), who wants to force Starrett and the others off the land.Shane stays for supper and the night at the invitation of Joe's wife, Marian (Jean Arthur), and starts working as a farmhand. Young Joey (Brandon deWilde) is drawn to him and the gun, and wants to learn how to shoot. Shane tries to teach him and his mother that a gun is a tool like any other, except it's designed to shoot people. Whether it's used for good or not depends on the person using it.There is an obvious attraction, and perhaps a history, between Shane and Marian. She tells Shane that they would be better off if there weren't any guns in the valley, including his. She is emphatic that guns are not going to be a part of her son's life.When Shane goes into town with Starrett and the rest of the homesteaders, he gets into a fistfight with Ryker's men after being ridiculed for backing down before. With Joe's help, they win, and the shopkeeper orders them out. Ryker declares that the next time Shane or Joe go to town the "air will be filled with gunsmoke."As tensions mount, Ryker hires Jack Wilson (Jack Palance), an unscrupulous, psychopathic gunslinger, who laughs at the thought of murder. Wilson goads ex-Confederate Frank 'Stonewall' Torrey (Elisha Cook, Jr.), a hot-tempered Alabama homesteader, into a fight, and shoots him down in the street.After the funeral, many plan to leave. But a fire set by Ryker's men spurs them into pulling together to put it out, rather than driving them out.Ryker decides to have Wilson kill Starrett in an ambush at the saloon, under the pretense of negotiating. One of Ryker's men loses his stomach for this, and warns Shane that Starrett's "up against a stacked deck."Joe is resolved to go anyway. He knows that Shane will look after Marian and Joey if he doesn't survive. But Shane tells Joe he's no match for Wilson, although he might be a match for Ryker. They fight and Shane has to knock him unconscious. Joey yells at Shane for pistol whipping his father with the butt of his gun.Marian begs Shane not to go and asks if he is doing it for her. He admits that he is, and for Joey, and all the decent people who want a chance to live and grow up there.In town, Shane walks into the saloon. Shane tells Ryker that they're both relics of the Old West, but Ryker hasn't realized it yet. Wilson draws, but is shot and keeps reflexively shooting, even after he's dead. Ryker pulls a hidden gun and Shane returns fire. He's turned to leave when Ryker's brother fires a Winchester rifle from the balcony overhead. Joey, who ran after Shane, calls out and Shane fires back.Shane walks out of the saloon, where Joey is waiting for him. He says that he has to move on and tells him to take care of his family. Shane also says to tell Joey's mother that there "aren't any more guns in the valley."Shane's blood runs onto Joey's hands when he reaches up to him. Joey's worried, but Shane tells him that's fine. Wounded, Shane sits up, with his arm hanging uselessly at his side as he rides past the grave markers on Cemetery Hill, and out of town, into the sunrise, over the mountains.Whether Shane has been mortally wounded, as is often speculated, is apparent in neither the film nor in Schaefer's novel.Palance was the last living cast member when he died in 2006.Although the film is fiction, elements of the setting are derived from Wyoming's Johnson County War (1892).[4] The physical setting is the high plains near Jackson Hole, Wyoming, and many shots feature the Grand Teton massif looming in the near distance. Other filming took place at Paramount Studios in Hollywood, California.Director George Stevens originally cast Montgomery Clift as Shane, William Holden as Joe Starrett; when they both proved unavailable, the film was nearly abandoned.[5] Stevens asked studio head Y. Frank Freeman for a list of available actors with current contracts. Within three minutes, he chose Alan Ladd, Van Heflin and Jean Arthur, though Arthur was not the first choice to play Marian; Katharine Hepburn was originally considered for the role. Even though she had not made a picture in five years, Arthur accepted the part at the request of George Stevens with whom she had worked in two earlier films, The Talk of the Town (1942) and The More the Merrier (1943) for which she received her only Oscar nomination. Shane marked her last film appearance (when the film was shot she was 50 years old, significantly older than her two male co-stars), although she later appeared in theater and a short-lived television series.Although the film was made between July and October 1951, it was not released until 1953 due to director Stevens' extensive editing. The film cost so much to make that at one point, Paramount negotiated its sale to Howard Hughes, who later pulled out of the arrangement.[citation needed] The studio felt the film would never recoup its costs, though it ended up making a significant profit. Another story[specify] reported that Paramount was going to release the film as "just another western" until Hughes watched a rough cut of the film and offered to buy it on the spot from Paramount for his RKO Radio Pictures. Hughes' offer made Paramount reconsider the film for a major release.Jack Palance had problems with horses and Alan Ladd with guns. The scene where Shane practices shooting in front of Joey required 116 takes.[citation needed] A scene where Jack Palance (credited as Walter Jack Palance) mounts his horse was actually a shot of him dismounting, but played in reverse. As well, the original planned introduction of Wilson galloping into town was replaced with him simply walking in on his horse, which was noted as improving the entrance by making him seem more threatening.Shane was the first film to be projected in a "flat" widescreen, a format that Paramount invented in order to offer audiences something that Television could nota panoramic screen.[6] Paramount, in conjunction with the management of Radio City Music Hall, installed a screen measuring 50 feet wide by 30 feet high,[7] replacing the Hall's previous screen, which was 34 feet wide by 25 feet high.[8] Although the film's image was shot using the standard 1.37:1 Academy ratio, Paramount picked Shane to debut their new wide-screen system because it was composed largely of long and medium shots that would not be compromised by cropping the image. Using a newly cut aperture plate in the movie projector, as well as a wider-angle lens, the film was exhibited in its first-run venues at an aspect ratio of 1.66:1. Just before the premiere, Paramount announced that all of their films would be shot for this ratio from then on.[6] This was changed in 1954, when the studio changed their house aspect ratio to 1.85:1.The film was originally released with a conventional optical soundtrack in April 1953, but the success of the film convinced the producers to re-mix the soundtrack in May with a new three-track, stereophonic soundtrack, which was recorded and played on a 35mm magnetic full coat reel installed by Altec, in interlock on another dubber in the projection booth.[9] This process was new to the general public, only having been debuted in New York City with This is Cinerama and nationally with Warner Bros. picture, House of Wax.The film was also one of the first films to attempt to re-create the overwhelming sound of gunfire. Warren Beatty cited this aspect of Shane as inspiration during the filming of Bonnie and Clyde.[10]In addition, Shane was one of the first films in which actors were attached to hidden wires that yanked them backwards when they were shot from the front. Director George Stevens also used a small cannon and fired it into a garbage can to create the loud report of the pistol for maximum effect. Stevens was in World War II and saw what a single bullet can do to a man.[11]In the mid to late 1970s, the Welsh television station HTV Cymru/Wales broadcast a version dubbed into the Welsh language.[12]The film opened in New York City at Radio City Music Hall on April 23, 1953.[8] According to Motion Picture Daily, "opening day business at the Music Hall was close to capacity. The audience at the first performance applauded at the end of a fight sequence and again at the end of the picture.[13]Bosley Crowther, after attending the premiere, called the film a "rich and dramatic mobile painting of the American frontier scene" and noted:Crowther called "the concept and the presence" of Joey, the little boy played by Brandon deWilde, as being key to "permit[ting] a refreshing viewpoint on material that's not exactly new. For it's this youngster's frank enthusiasms and naive reactions that are made the solvent of all the crashing drama in A. B. Guthrie Jr.'s script."[14]Shane ended its run at Radio City Music Hall on May 20, 1953, racking up $114,000 in four weeks at Radio City.[15]Nearly 50 years later, Woody Allen called Shane "George Stevens' masterpiece" and said it is on his "list of great American films, which include, among others, ... The Treasure of the Sierra Madre, White Heat, Double Indemnity, The Informer and The Hill by Sidney Lumet.... Shane...is a great movie and can hold its own with any film, whether it's a western or not."[16]AwardsNominationsOtherAmerican Film Institute recognitionClint Eastwood's western Pale Rider pays tribute to Shane with a similar plot and similar ending. The movie Nowhere to Run (1993) with Jean-Claude Van Damme and Rosanna Arquette was loosely based on Shane. The 1965 comedy western Cat Ballou spoofs Shane in various ways. Its buckskin-clad "good" gunfighter Kid Shelleen and black-clad villain Tim Strawn are obviously patterned after Shane and Jack Wilson, respectively, though in Cat Ballou the two adversaries turn out to be brothers. The McBain family funeral scene in the Sergio Leone epic Once Upon a Time in the West (1968) is borrowed almost shot-for-shot from the funeral scene in Shane.The 1984 album The Pros and Cons of Hitch Hiking by British musician and Pink Floyd founder member Roger Waters references the movie Shane extensively. Mainly in the track "5.01AM" where audio samples from the movie are used to punctuate verses of the song.It is also speculated that the animated series Cowboy Bebop based its final episode loosely on the ending as an homage.The 1966 television series Batman featured a cowboy-themed villain called "Shame" played by Cliff Robertson. The storyline that introduces Shame also riffs on the film's famous catchphrase, featuring a young boy calling "Come back, Shame!"The "Come back, Shane" catchphrase was also referenced by Charles M. Schulz in his Peanuts comic strip on occasion (see March 23, 1989 strip).In the "Jerky Boys the Movie" Kamal says, "Come back Shane" when they show the Caravan Pictures logo.In the 1998 film The Negotiator, Kevin Spacey's character tries to convince Samuel L. Jackson's character that viewers should conclude that Shane is dead at the end of the movie because he is slumped over his horse and unable to look back. Jackson's character contends that Shane's death is only an assumption. "Slumped don't mean dead," he says.In 2006, Shane was the subject of a major legal case in Japan involving the expiration of its copyright in Japan. First Trading Corporation had been selling budget-priced copies of public domain movies, including Shane, as Japanese law only protected cinematographic works for 50 years from the year it was publishedwhich meant that Shane fell into the public domain in 2003. In a lawsuit filed by Paramount, it was contested that Shane was not in the public domain in Japan due to an amendment which extended the copyright term for these works from 50 to 70 years, and came into effect on January 1, 2004. It was later ruled that the new law was not retroactive, and any film produced during or before 1953 was not eligible for the extension.[19]20. The Making of Shane, Walt Farmer, Jackson, WY, 2001April 23, 1953(1953-04-23)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production notes

3.1 Technical details

3.1 Technical details4 Reception5 Awards and honors6 Homages7 Copyright status in Japan8 References9 External links3.1 Technical detailsAlan Ladd as ShaneJean Arthur as Marian StarrettVan Heflin as Joe StarrettBrandon deWilde as Joey StarrettJack Palance (credited as Walter Jack Palance) as Jack WilsonBen Johnson as Chris CallowayEdgar Buchanan as Fred LewisEmile Meyer as Rufus RykerElisha Cook, Jr. as Frank 'Stonewall' TorreyDouglas Spencer as Axel 'Swede' ShipsteadJohn Dierkes as Morgan RykerEllen Corby as Mrs. Liz TorreyPaul McVey as Sam GraftonJohn Miller as Will Atkey, bartenderEdith Evanson as Mrs. ShipsteadLeonard Strong as Ernie WrightNancy Kulp as Mrs. HowellsAcademy Award for Best Cinematography, Color, Loyal Griggs; 1954Academy Awards:

Best Actor in a Supporting Role, Brandon deWilde
Best Actor in a Supporting Role, Jack Palance
Best Director, George Stevens
Best Picture, George Stevens
Best Writing, Screenplay, A.B. Guthrie Jr.; 1954

Best Actor in a Supporting Role, Brandon deWildeBest Actor in a Supporting Role, Jack PalanceBest Director, George StevensBest Picture, George StevensBest Writing, Screenplay, A.B. Guthrie Jr.; 1954Best Actor in a Supporting Role, Brandon deWildeBest Actor in a Supporting Role, Jack PalanceBest Director, George StevensBest Picture, George StevensBest Writing, Screenplay, A.B. Guthrie Jr.; 1954In 1993, Shane was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".Shane was listed at #69 on the original AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies list in 1997. When the list was revisited in 2007, it rose to #45.In June 2008, AFI revealed its "Ten top Ten"the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genresafter polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. Shane was listed as the third best film in the western genre.[17][18]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #69AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Shane, Hero #16

Shane, Hero #16AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes #47

"Shane. Shane. Come back!"

"Shane. Shane. Come back!"AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers #53AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #45AFI's 10 Top 10 #3 WesternShane, Hero #16"Shane. Shane. Come back!"Shane at the Internet Movie DatabaseShane at the TCM Movie DatabaseShane at AllRoviShane at Rotten TomatoesShane at Filmsite.org"The Making of Shane"The French Connection is a 1971 American dramatic thriller film directed by William Friedkin and produced by Philip D'Antoni. It starred Gene Hackman, Fernando Rey and Roy Scheider. The film was adapted and fictionalized by Ernest Tidyman from the non-fiction book by Robin Moore. It tells the story of New York Police Department detectives named "Popeye" Doyle and Buddy "Cloudy" Russo, whose real-life counterparts were Narcotics Detectives Eddie Egan and Sonny Grosso. Egan and Grosso also appear in the film, as characters other than themselves.It was the first R-rated movie to win the Academy Award for Best Picture since the introduction of the MPAA film rating system. It also won Academy Awards for Best Actor (Gene Hackman), Best Director, Best Film Editing, and Best Adapted Screenplay (Ernest Tidyman). It was nominated for Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Roy Scheider), Best Cinematography and Best Sound. Tidyman also received a Golden Globe Award, a Writers Guild of America Award and an Edgar Award for his screenplay.In 2005, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."The film revolves around the smuggling of narcotics between Marseilles, France and New York City. In Marseilles a policeman is staking out Alain Charnier (Fernando Rey), a French criminal who is smuggling heroin from France to the United States. The policeman is assassinated by Charnier's henchman, Pierre Nicoli (Marcel Bozzuffi).In New York, detectives James "Popeye" Doyle (Gene Hackman) and Buddy "Cloudy" Russo (Roy Scheider) are conducting an undercover stakeout in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn. After seeing a drug transaction take place in a bar, Russo goes in to make an arrest and the suspect makes a break for it. After catching up with their suspect and delivering a severe beating after the suspect cuts Russo on the arm with a knife, the detectives aggressively interrogate the man, forcing him to reveal where his connection is based.After Russo's injury is treated, Doyle convinces him to go out for a drink. At the Copacabana, Doyle becomes interested in Salvatore "Sal" Boca (Tony Lo Bianco) and his young wife, Angie (Arlene Farber), who are entertaining Mob members involved in narcotics. Doyle persuades his partner to tail the couple; although the Bocas run a modest newsstand luncheonette, they have criminal records: Sal is said to have held up Tiffany and also killed "a guy named DeMarco" while Angie drew a suspended sentence for shoplifting and Sal's brother Lou served jail time for assault and robbery. They make nearly nightly trips to several nightclubs, as well as drive several new cars, which indicate they may be involved in criminal activity. A link is established between the Bocas and lawyer Joel Weinstock (Harold Gray), who is rumored to have connections in the narcotics underworld; Doyle and Russo allude to a drug shipment from Mexico bankrolled by Weinstock.Doyle and Russo roust a bar in their precinct, where the majority of the black patrons are in possession of marijuana and other minor drugs. The rousting is a stunt for Doyle to connect with an informant, whom he questions about an apparent shortage of hard drugs on the street; Doyle is told that a major shipment of heroin is on its way. The detectives convince their supervisor, Walt Simonson (Eddie Egan), to wiretap the Bocas' phones and use several ruses to try to obtain more information.The film centers on three main points: the criminals' efforts to smuggle drugs into the United States, which is made easier when Charnier dupes his friend, a French actor named Henri Devereaux (Frdric de Pasquale), into importing an automobile (unbeknownst to Devereaux, the drugs are concealed within the vehicle) and the sale of the drugs to Weinstock and Sal Boca; the efforts of Doyle and Russo to shadow Boca and Charnier; and the conflicts the detectives have with Simonson and a federal agent named Mulderig (Bill Hickman), assigned to the case due to the wiretap. Doyle and Mulderig dislike each other; Russo and Doyle feel they can handle the bust without the government's help, and Mulderig criticizes Doyle on items ranging from trivialities like Doyle's appearance to an incident where a policeman was killed and Mulderig holds Doyle responsible. Doyle comes to blows with Mulderig.Weinstock's chemist (Pat McDermott) tests a sample of the heroin and declares it the purest he has ever seen, establishing that the shipment could make as much as $32 million on a half-million dollar investment. Boca is impatient to make the purchase (reflecting Charnier's desire to return to France as soon as possible), while Weinstock, with more experience in smuggling, urges patience, knowing Boca's phone is tapped and that they are being investigated.Charnier soon "makes" Doyle and realizes he has been observed since his arrival in New York. Nicoli offers to kill Doyle; Charnier objects, knowing killing one policeman will not amount to anything, but Nicoli says they will be in France before they can be detained. Nicoli attempts to assassinate Doyle, but botches the job, leading to a car chase scene that culminates with Nicoli's hijacking an elevated train.Nicoli, after killing a policeman who was pursuing him, holds the driver at gunpoint. Near the end of the line Nicoli is confronted by passengers and the motorman passes out. The train reaches the end of the line and is halted by a safety mechanism on the tracks. Nicoli escapes the train and Doyle shoots him when he attempts to escape. The car containing the drugs is impounded when some thieves try to strip it of its valuables. Doyle and Russo take the car apart searching for drugs. When Russo notes the vehicle is 120 pounds over its listed weight, they realize the drugs must still be in the car. The mechanic tells them he did not remove the car's rocker panels; when he does, the drugs are discovered. The police later return the car to Devereaux, seemingly untouched.It seems as though the drug deal has been a major success; Weinstock's chemist tests one of the bags and confirms its quality. Using a car that Sal Boca's brother Lou (Benny Marino) picked out, the criminals conceal the money. The car is to be imported into France, where Charnier will retrieve the money. Charnier and Sal Boca drive off, but run into a roadblock consisting of a large force of police led by Doyle. The police chase Charnier and Sal Boca to an old factory. Sal is killed during a shootout with the police and almost all of the others surrender.Charnier escapes into the warehouse and Doyle hunts for him. Russo joins in the search. Doyle, trigger-happy and high on adrenaline, sees a shadowy figure in the distance and empties his revolver at it a split-second after shouting a warning. The man Doyle kills is not Charnier, but Mulderig. Doyle seems unfazed and vows to capture Charnier, reloading his gun and running into another room. The last sound heard in the film is a single gunshot. (In the TV version that ran in the late 1970s, Doyle says of getting Charnier, I'm going to get that son of a bitch if it takes me the rest of my life!!)Title cards before the closing credits note that Joel Weinstock and Angie Boca got away without prison time while Lou Boca got a reduced sentence and Devereaux served four years. Charnier was never caught. Both Doyle and Russo were transferred out of the narcotics division and reassigned.The plot centers around drug smuggling in the 1960s and early '70s, when most of the heroin illegally imported into the East Coast came to the United States through France (see French Connection). In addition to the two main protagonists, several of the fictional characters depicted in the film also have real-life counterparts. The Alain Charnier character is based upon Jean Jehan who was arrested later in Paris for drug trafficking, though he was not extradited;[3] the director credits a general lack of punishment to Jehan's military service with Charles de Gaulle. Sal Boca is based on Pasquale "Patsy" Fuca, and his brother Anthony. Angie Boca is based on Patsy's wife Barbara, who later wrote a book with Robin Moore detailing her life with Patsy. The Fucas and their uncle were part of a heroin dealing crew that worked with some of the New York crime families.[4] Henri Devereaux, who takes the fall for importing the Lincoln to New York, is based on Jacques Angelvin, a television actor arrested and sentenced to three to six years in a federal penetentiary for his role, serving about four before repatriating to France and turning to real estate.[5][unreliable source] The Joel Weinstock character is, according to the director's commentary, a composite of several similar drug dealers.[6]In an audio commentary track recorded by Friedkin for the Collector's Edition DVD release of the film, Friedkin notes that the film's documentary-like realism was the direct result of the influence of having seen Z, a French film. Additionally, this was the first film to show the World Trade Center: the completed North Tower and the partial completion of the South Tower are seen in the background of one scene.Friedkin credits his decision to direct the movie to a discussion with film director Howard Hawks, whose daughter was living with Friedkin at the time. Friedkin asked Hawks what he thought of his movies, to which Hawks bluntly replied that they were "lousy." Instead Hawks recommended that he "Make a good chase. Make one better than anyone's done."[7]Though the cast ultimately proved to be one of the film's greatest strengths, Friedkin had problems with casting choices from the start. He was strongly opposed to the choice of Hackman for the lead, and actually first considered Paul Newman (out of the budget range), then Jackie Gleason, and a New York columnist, Jimmy Breslin, who had never acted before.[8] However, Gleason, at that time, was considered box-office poison by the studio after his film Gigot had flopped several years before, and Breslin refused to get behind the wheel of a car, which was required of Popeye's character for an integral car chase scene. Steve McQueen was also considered, but he did not want to do another police film after Bullitt and, as with Newman, his fee would have exceeded the movie's budget. Tough guy Charles Bronson was also considered for the role. Friedkin almost settled for Rod Taylor (who had actively pursued the role, according to Hackman), another choice the studio approved, before he went with Hackman.The eventually successful casting of Rey as the main French heroin smuggler, Alain Charnier (irreverently referred to throughout the film as "Frog One"), resulted from mistaken identity. Friedkin had asked his casting director to get a Spanish actor he had seen in Luis Buuel's French film, Belle de Jour, who was actually Francisco Rabal, but Friedkin did not know his name, and Rey, who had played in several other films directed by Buuel, was instead contacted. After Rabal was finally reached, they discovered he spoke neither French nor English and Rey was kept in the film.[9] In a further irony, after screening the film's final cut, Rey's French was deemed unacceptable by the filmmakers. They decided to dub his French while preserving his English dialogue.The film is often cited as containing one of the greatest car chase sequences in movie history.[10] The chase involves Popeye commandeering a civilian's car (a 1971 Pontiac LeMans) and then frantically chasing an elevated train, on which a hitman is trying to escape. The scene was filmed in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn roughly running under the BMT West End Line (currently; the D train, then the B train) which runs on an elevated track above Stillwell Avenue, 86th Street and New Utrecht Avenue in Brooklyn, with the chase ending just north of the 62nd Street station after the train crashed into another train up ahead.[11] The conductor played by Bob Morrone and train operator played by William Coke, aboard the hijacked train were both actual NYC Transit Authority employees.[12][unreliable source] Friedkin's plan included fast driving coupled with five specific stunts:The most famous shot of the chase is made from a front bumper mount and shows a low-angle point of view shot of the streets racing by. This was the last shot made in the film and was, according to Friedkin, needed to increase the speed of the chase after a rough cut of the scene proved less impressive than he hoped. While Friedkin contends the front-bumper shot is made at speeds of "up to 90mph," director of photography Owen Roizman, wrote in American Cinematographer magazine in 1972 that the camera was undercranked to 18 frames per second to enhance the sense of speed. Roizman's contention is borne out when you see a car at a red light whose muffler is pumping smoke at an accelerated rate. Other shots involved stunt drivers who were supposed to barely miss hitting the speeding car, but due to errors in timing accidental collisions occurred and were left in the final film.[13] Friedkin said that he used Santana's song "Black Magic Woman" during editing to help shape the chase sequence; though the song does not appear in the film, "it [the chase scene] did have a sort of pre-ordained rhythm to it that came from the music."[14]The scene concludes with Doyle confronting Nicoli the hitman at the stairs leading to the subway and shooting him as he tries to run back up them. Many of the police officers acting as advisers for the film objected to the scene on the grounds that shooting a suspect in the back was simply murder, not self-defense, but director Friedkin stood by it, stating that he was "secure in my conviction that that's exactly what Eddie Egan (the model for Doyle) would have done and Eddie was on the set while all of this was being shot."[15][16]Wins[17][18]NominationsWins[19]NominationsThe film has been issued in a number of home video formats. For a 2009 reissue on Blu-ray Disc, William Friedkin controversially altered the film's color timing to give it a "colder" look.[20] Cinematographer Owen Roizman, who was not consulted about the changes, dismissed the new transfer as "atrocious".[21]A sequel, French Connection II appeared in 1975, and in 1986, the NBC television network aired a made-for-TV movie, Popeye Doyle, starring Ed O'Neill in the title role.While not a sequel, The Seven-Ups (1973) is closely related as it stars Roy Scheider and Tony Lo Bianco, was directed by Philip D'Antoni, written by Sonny Grosso and features another famous car chase choreographed by Bill Hickman. The score for this film was also by Don Ellis.October 9, 1971(1971-10-09)1 Plot2 Cast

2.1 Comparison to actual people

2.1 Comparison to actual people3 Production

3.1 Casting
3.2 Car chase

3.1 Casting3.2 Car chase4 Awards and honors

4.1 Academy Awards
4.2 Golden Globes

4.1 Academy Awards4.2 Golden Globes5 Home video6 Sequels and adaptations7 References8 External links2.1 Comparison to actual people3.1 Casting3.2 Car chase4.1 Academy Awards4.2 Golden GlobesGene Hackman as Det. Jimmy 'Popeye' DoyleFernando Rey as Alain CharnierRoy Scheider as Det. Buddy 'Cloudy' RussoTony Lo Bianco as Salvatore 'Sal' BocaMarcel Bozzuffi as Pierre Nicoli, Hit ManFrdric de Pasquale as Henri DevereauxBill Hickman as Bill MulderigAnn Rebbot as Mrs. Marie CharnierHarold Gary as Joel WeinstockArlene Farber as Angie BocaEddie Egan as Walt SimonsonAndr Ernotte as La ValleSonny Grosso as Bill KleinBenny Marino as Lou BocaPatrick McDermott as Howard, ChemistAlan Weeks as Willie Craven, drug pusherAndre Trottier as Wyett Cohn, weapons specialistSheila Ferguson as The Three DegreesEric Jones as Little Boy (uncredited)Darby Lloyd Rains as Stripper (uncredited)Jean Luisi as French detectiveBest Picture - Phillip D'AntoniBest Director - William FriedkinBest Actor - Gene HackmanBest Adapted ScreenplayFilm EditingBest Supporting Actor - Roy ScheiderBest CinematographyBest Sound - Theodore Soderberg, Christopher NewmanGolden Globe for Best Motion Picture - Drama - Phillip D'AntoniGolden Globe Award for Best Director - William FriedkinGolden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture Drama - Gene HackmanGolden Globe Award for Best Screenplay - Ernest TidymanThe French Connection at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe French Connection at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe French Connection at AllRoviThe French Connection at Rotten TomatoesUnder the Influence: William Friedkin and The French Connection, DGA Magazine.Anatomy of a Chase, DGA Magazine.Filmmaking at 90 Miles Per Hour retrospective article in The New York TimesForrest Gump is a 1994 American romantic comedy-drama film based on the 1986 novel of the same name by Winston Groom. The film was directed by Robert Zemeckis and starred Tom Hanks, Robin Wright, Gary Sinise and Sally Field. The story depicts several decades in the life of Forrest Gump, a nave and slow-witted yet athletically prodigious native of Alabama who witnesses, and in some cases influences, some of the defining events of the latter half of the 20th century; more specifically, the period between Forrest's birth in 1945 and 1982.The film differs substantially from Winston Groom's novel on which it is based, including Gump's personality and several events that were depicted. Filming took place in late 1993, mainly in Georgia, North Carolina, and South Carolina. Extensive visual effects were used to incorporate the protagonist into archived footage and to develop other scenes. A comprehensive soundtrack was featured in the film, using music intended to pinpoint specific time periods portrayed on screen. Its commercial release made it a top-selling soundtrack, selling over twelve million copies worldwide.Released in the United States on July 6, 1994, Forrest Gump was well received by critics and became a commercial success as the top grossing film in North America released that year, being the first major success for Paramount Pictures since the studio's sale to Viacom earlier in the year. The film earned over $677million worldwide during its theatrical run. The film won the Academy Awards for Best Picture, Best Director for Robert Zemeckis, Best Actor for Tom Hanks, Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Visual Effects and Best Film Editing. It also garnered multiple other awards and nominations, including Golden Globe Awards, People's Choice Awards and Young Artist Awards, among others. Since the film's release, varying interpretations have been made of the film's protagonist and its political symbolism. In 1996, a themed restaurant opened based on the film, and has since expanded to multiple locations worldwide. The scene of Gump running across the country is often referred to when real-life people attempt the feat.[2] In 2011, the Library of Congress selected Forrest Gump for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."[3]During his wait at a bus stop, Forrest Gump (Tom Hanks) starts telling his life story to strangers on his bench sitting next to him. The story begins with the leg braces he had to wear as a child, which resulted in him being bullied by children. He lives with his mother (Sally Field), who tells him that "stupid is as stupid does". Forrest teaches one of their guests, a young Elvis Presley, a hip-swinging dance. At school, Forrest meets Jenny (Robin Wright), with whom he immediately falls in love, and they become best friends. Forrest discovers that he can run very fast which, despite his below-average intelligence, earns him a scholarship to the University of Alabama from Bear Bryant. While in college, he witnesses George Wallace's Stand in the Schoolhouse Door, is named an All-American football player, and meets President John F. Kennedy.After graduating, Forrest enlists in the United States Army, where he becomes friends with Benjamin Buford "Bubba" Blue (Mykelti Williamson), and they agree to go into the shrimping business together. They are sent to Vietnam, and when their platoon is ambushed, Forrest saves many of the men in his platoon, including platoon leader 2nd Lt. Dan Taylor (Gary Sinise), but Bubba is killed. Forrest himself is injured and receives the Medal of Honor from President Lyndon B. Johnson. While recovering from his injuries Forrest meets Dan Taylor again. Now an amputee, he is furious at Forrest for leaving him a "cripple" and cheating him out of his destiny to die in battle like his ancestors. In Washington, Forrest is swept up in an anti-war rally at the National Mall and is reunited with Jenny, who is now part of the hippie counterculture movement. They spend the night walking around the capital, but she leaves with her abusive boyfriend the following day.Forrest discovers an aptitude for ping pong and begins playing for the U.S. Army team, eventually competing against Chinese teams on a goodwill tour. He goes to the White House again and meets President Richard Nixon who provides him a room at the Watergate hotel, where Forrest inadvertently helps expose the Watergate scandal. For his numerous accomplishments, Forrest is invited onto The Dick Cavett Show. He again encounters Dan Taylor, now an embittered drunk living on welfare. Dan is scornful of Forrest's plans to enter the shrimping business and mockingly promises to be Forrest's first mate if he ever succeeds.Using money from a ping pong endorsement, Forrest buys a shrimping boat, fulfilling his wartime promise to Bubba. Dan keeps his own promise and joins Forrest as first mate. They initially have little luck; but, after Hurricane Carmen destroys every other shrimping boat in the region, the Bubba Gump Shrimp Company becomes a huge success. Having had an epiphany during the hurricane, Dan finally thanks Forrest for saving his life. Forrest then returns home to care for his ailing mother, who dies soon afterwards. Forrest leaves the company in the hands of Dan, who invests their wealth in shares of Apple, making them both millionaires.Jenny returns to visit Forrest and stays with him. Forrest asks her to marry him, but she declines and slips away early one morning. Distraught, Forrest decides to go for a run, which turns into a three-year coast-to-coast marathon. Forrest becomes a celebrity and attracts followers. One day he stops suddenly and returns home. He receives a letter from Jenny asking to meet, which brings him to the bus stop where he began telling his story. Once he and Jenny are reunited, Forrest discovers they have a young son, also named Forrest (Haley Joel Osment). Jenny reveals that she is suffering from an unknown virus. She proposes to him and he accepts. They return to Alabama with Forrest Jr. and marry, but Jenny dies soon after. Forrest waits with Forrest Jr. for the bus to pick him up for his first day of school. As the bus drives away, Forrest sits on the same tree stump where his mother sat on his first day of school and watches his feather bookmark float off in the wind."The writer, Eric Roth, departed substantially from the book. We flipped the two elements of the book, making the love story primary and the fantastic adventures secondary. Also, the book was cynical and colder than the movie. In the movie, Gump is a completely decent character, always true to his word. He has no agenda and no opinion about anything except Jenny, his mother and God."The film is based on the 1986 novel by Winston Groom. Both center on the character of Forrest Gump. However, the film primarily focuses on the first eleven chapters of the novel, before skipping ahead to the end of the novel with the founding of Bubba Gump Shrimp Co. and the meeting with Forrest, Jr. In addition to skipping some parts of the novel, the film adds several aspects to Gump's life that do not occur in the novel, such as his needing leg braces as a child and his run across the United States.[14]Gump's core character and personality are also changed from the novel; among other things his film character is less of an autistic savantin the novel, while playing football at the university, he fails craft and gym, but receives a perfect score in an advanced physics class he is enrolled in by his coach to satisfy his college requirements.[14] The novel also features Gump as an astronaut, a professional wrestler, and a chess player.[14]Two directors were offered the opportunity to direct the film before Robert Zemeckis was selected. Terry Gilliam turned down the offer to direct.[15] Barry Sonnenfeld was attached to the film but left to direct Addams Family Values.[16]Filming began in August 1993 and ended four months later in December.[17] Although most of the film is set in Alabama, filming took place mainly in Beaufort, South Carolina, as well as parts of coastal Virginia and North Carolina,[6] including a running shot on the Blue Ridge Parkway.[18] The scene of Forrest running through Vietnam while under fire was filmed on Fripp Island, South Carolina.[19] Additional filming took place on the Biltmore Estate in Asheville, NC and along the Blue Ridge Parkway near Boone, NC. The most notable place was Grandfather Mountain where a part of the road is named "Forrest Gump Curve".[20] The Gump family home set was built along the Combahee River near Yemassee, South Carolina and the nearby land was used to film Curran's home as well as some of the Vietnam scenes.[21] Over 20palmetto trees were planted to improve the Vietnam scenes.[21] Forrest Gump narrated his life's story in Chippewa Square in Savannah, Georgia as he sat at a bus stop bench. There were other scenes filmed in and around the Savannah area as well, including a running shot on the Houlihan Bridge (Port Wentworth, Georgia) while he was being interviewed by the press, and on West Bay Street in Savannah.[21] Most of the college campus scenes were filmed in Los Angeles at the University of Southern California.Ken Ralston and his team at Industrial Light & Magic were responsible for the film's visual effects. Using CGI techniques, it was possible to depict Gump meeting deceased personages and shaking their hands. Hanks was first shot against a blue screen along with reference markers so that he could line up with the archive footage.[22] To record the voices of the historical figures, voice doubles were hired and special effects were used to alter the mouth movements for the new dialogue.[13] Archival footage was used and with the help of such techniques as chroma key, image warping, morphing, and rotoscoping, Hanks was integrated into it.In one Vietnam War scene, Gump carries Bubba away from an incoming napalm attack. To create the effect, stunt actors were initially used for compositing purposes. Then Hanks and Williamson were filmed, with Williamson supported by a cable wire as Hanks ran with him. The explosion was then filmed, and the actors were digitally added to appear just in front of the explosions. The jet fighters and napalm canisters were also added by CGI.[23]The CGI removal of actor Gary Sinise's legs, after his character had them amputated, was achieved by wrapping his legs with a blue fabric, which later facilitated the work of the "roto-paint" team to paint out his legs from every single frame. At one point, while hoisting himself into his wheelchair, his legs are used for support.[24]The scene where Forrest spots Jenny at a peace rally at the Lincoln Memorial and Reflecting Pool in Washington, D.C., required visual effects to create the large crowd of people. Over two days of filming, approximately 1,500 extras were used.[25] At each successive take, the extras were rearranged and moved into a different quadrant away from the camera. With the help of computers, the extras were multiplied to create a crowd of several hundred thousand people.[6][25]The film has received mostly positive reviews. The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 71percent of critics gave the film a positive review based on a sample of 53reviews, with an average score of 7/10.[26] At the website Metacritic, which utilizes a normalized rating system, the film earned a favorable rating of 82/100 based on 19reviews by mainstream critics.[27]The story was commended by several critics. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times wrote, "I've never met anyone like Forrest Gump in a movie before, and for that matter I've never seen a movie quite like 'Forrest Gump.' Any attempt to describe him will risk making the movie seem more conventional than it is, but let me try. It's a comedy, I guess. Or maybe a drama. Or a dream. The screenplay by Eric Roth has the complexity of modern fiction . . . The performance is a breathtaking balancing act between comedy and sadness, in a story rich in big laughs and quiet truths. . . . What a magical movie."[28] Todd McCarthy of Variety wrote that the film "...has been very well worked out on all levels, and manages the difficult feat of being an intimate, even delicate tale played with an appealingly light touch against an epic backdrop."[29] In addition, the film received notable pans from several major reviewers. Anthony Lane of The New Yorker called the film "Warm, wise, and wearisome as hell."[30] Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly said that the film "...reduces the tumult of the last few decades to a virtual-reality theme park: a baby-boomer version of Disney's America."[31]Critics had mixed views on the main character. Gump has been compared with various characters and people including Huckleberry Finn, Bill Clinton, and Ronald Reagan.[32][33][34] Peter Chomo writes that Gump acts as a "...social mediator and as an agent of redemption in divided times".[35] Peter Travers of Rolling Stone called Gump "...everything we admire in the American character  honest, brave, loyal...".[36] The New York Times reviewer Janet Maslin called Gump a "...hollow man..." who is "...self-congratulatory in his blissful ignorance, warmly embraced as the embodiment of absolutely nothing."[37] Marc Vincenti of Palo Alto Weekly called the character "...a pitiful stooge taking the pie of life in the face, thoughtfully licking his fingers."[38] Bruce Kawin and Gerald Mast's textbook on film history notes that Forrest Gump's dimness was a metaphor for glamorized nostalgia in that he represented a blank slate by which the Baby Boomer generation projected their memories of those events.[39]Film critic Pauline Kael stated, "I hated it thoroughly."[40]The film is commonly seen as a polarizing one for audiences, with Entertainment Weekly writing in 2004, "Nearly a decade after it earned gazillions and swept the Oscars, Robert Zemeckis's ode to 20th-century America still represents one of cinema's most clearly drawn lines in the sand. One half of folks see it as an artificial piece of pop melodrama, while everyone else raves that it's sweet as a box of chocolates."[41]Produced on a budget of $55million, Forrest Gump opened in 1,595theaters in its first weekend of domestic release, earning $24,450,602.[1] Motion picture business consultant and screenwriter Jeffrey Hilton suggested to producer Wendy Finerman to double the P&A (film marketing budget) based on his viewing of an early print of the film. The budget was immediately increased, per his advice. The film placed first in the weekend's box office, narrowly beating The Lion King, which was in its fourth week of release.[1] For the first ten weeks of its release, the film held the number one position at the box office.[42] The film remained in theaters for 42weeks, earning $329.7million in the United States and Canada, making it the fourth-highest grossing film at that time (behind only E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, Star Wars IV: A New Hope, and Jurassic Park).[42][43]The film took 66days to surpass $250million and was the fastest grossing Paramount film to pass $100million, $200million, and $300million in box office receipts (at the time of its release).[44][45][46] The film had gross receipts of $329,694,499 in the U.S. and Canada and $347,693,217 in international markets for a total of $677,387,716 worldwide.[1] Even with such revenue, the film was known as a "successful failure"-- due to distributors' and exhibitors' high fees, Paramount's "losses" clocked in at $62 million, leaving executives realizing the necessity of better deals.[47] This has however also been associated with Hollywood accounting, where expenses are inflated in order to minimize profit sharing.Forrest Gump was first released on VHS tape on April 27, 1995, as a two-disc Laserdisc set on April 28, 1995, (including the "Through the Eyes of Forrest" special feature), before being released in a two-disc DVD set on August 28, 2001. Special features included director and producer commentaries, production featurettes, and screen tests.[48] The film was released on Blu-ray disc in November 2009.[49]In addition to the following list of awards and nominations, the film was recognized by the American Film Institute on several of its lists. The film ranks 37th on 100 Years...100 Cheers, 71st on 100 Years...100 Movies, and 76th on 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition). In addition, the quote "Mama always said life was like a box of chocolates. You never know what you're gonna get." was ranked 40th on 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes.[50] The film also ranked at number 240 on Empire's list of the 500 Greatest Movies of All Time.In December 2011, Forrest Gump was selected for preservation in the Library of Congress' National Film Registry.[51] The Registry said that the film was "honored for its technological innovations (the digital insertion of Gump seamlessly into vintage archival footage), its resonance within the culture that has elevated Gump (and what he represents in terms of American innocence) to the status of folk hero, and its attempt to engage both playfully and seriously with contentious aspects of the era's traumatic history."[52]American Film Institute ListsWinston Groom was paid $350,000 for the screenplay rights to his novel Forrest Gump and was contracted for a 3percent share of the film's net profits.[76] However, Paramount and the film's producers did not pay him, using Hollywood accounting to posit that the blockbuster film lost money. Tom Hanks, by contrast, contracted for the film's gross receipts instead of a salary, and he and director Zemeckis each received $40million.[76][77] Additionally, Groom was not mentioned once in any of the film's six Oscar-winner speeches.[78]"I don't want to sound like a bad version of 'the child within'. But the childlike innocence of Forrest Gump is what we all once had. It's an emotional journey. You laugh and cry. It does what movies are supposed to do: make you feel alive."Various interpretations have been suggested for the feather present at the opening and conclusion of the film. Sarah Lyall of The New York Times noted several opinions that were made about the feather: "Does the white feather symbolize the unbearable lightness of being? Forrest Gump's impaired intellect? The randomness of experience?"[79] Hanks interpreted the feather as: "Our destiny is only defined by how we deal with the chance elements to our life and that's kind of the embodiment of the feather as it comes in. Here is this thing that can land anywhere and that it lands at your feet. It has theological implications that are really huge."[80] Sally Field compared the feather to fate, saying: "It blows in the wind and just touches down here or there. Was it planned or was it just perchance?"[81] Visual effects supervisor Ken Ralston compared the feather to an abstract painting: "It can mean so many things to so many different people."[82]The feather is stored in a book titled Curious George, Forrest's favorite book, which his mother read to him, connecting the scene's present time with his childhood in the 1940s. The placement of the feather in the book is directly on a picture of the monkey walking on a tightrope. Whether that was intentional or not, it is very symbolic. The feather also has a correlation with Jenny's constant obsession with "becoming a bird and flying far far away" due to the abuse (sexual and physical) she endured from her father. She goes as far in the film as to ask Forrest "if [she] jumped off the bridge, could [she] fly?"In Tom Hanks' words, "The film is non-political and thus non-judgmental".[34] Nevertheless, in 1994, CNN's Crossfire debated whether the film promoted conservative values or was an indictment of the counterculture movement of the 1960s. Thomas Byers, in a Modern Fiction Studies article, called the film "an aggressively conservative film".[83]"...all over the political map, people have been calling Forrest their own. But, Forrest Gump isn't about politics or conservative values. It's about humanity, it's about respect, tolerance and unconditional love."It has been noted that while Gump follows a very conservative lifestyle, Curran's life is full of countercultural embrace, complete with drug usage and antiwar rallies, and that their eventual marriage might be a kind of reconciliation.[28] Jennifer Hyland Wang argued in a Cinema Journal article that Curran's death to an unnamed virus "...symbolizes the death of liberal America and the death of the protests that defined a decade [1960s]." She also notes that the film's screenwriter, Eric Roth, when developing the screenplay from the novel, had "...transferred all of Gump's flaws and most of the excesses committed by Americans in the 1960s and 1970s to her [Curran]."[35]Other commentators believe that the film forecast the 1994 Republican Revolution and used the image of Forrest Gump to promote his traditional, conservative values. Jennifer Hyland Wang observes that the film idealizes the 1950s, as evidenced by the lack of "whites only" signs in Gump's southern childhood, and "revisions" the 1960s as a period of social conflict and confusion. She argues that this sharp contrast between the decades criticizes the counterculture values and reaffirms conservatism.[84] As viewed by political scientist Joe Paskett,[30] this film is "one of the best films of all time".[85] Wang argued that the film was used by Republican politicians to illustrate a "traditional version of recent history" to gear voters towards their ideology for the congressional elections.[35] In addition, presidential candidate Bob Dole cited the film's message in influencing his campaign due to its "...message that has made [the film] one of Hollywood's all-time greatest box office hits: no matter how great the adversity, the American Dream is within everybody's reach."[35]In 1995, National Review included Forrest Gump in its list of the "Best 100 Conservative Movies" of all time.[86] Then, in 2009, the magazine ranked the film number four on its 25 Best Conservative Movies of the Last 25 Years list.[87] "Tom Hanks plays the title character, an amiable dunce who is far too smart to embrace the lethal values of the 1960s. The love of his life, wonderfully played by Robin Wright Penn, chooses a different path; she becomes a drug-addled hippie, with disastrous results."[87]James Burton, a communication arts professor at Salisbury University, argued that conservatives claimed Forrest Gump as their own due less to the content of the film and more to the historical and cultural context of 1994. Burton claimed that the film's content and advertising campaign were affected by the cultural climate of the 1990s, which emphasized family values and "American values"values epitomized in the successful book Hollywood vs. America. He claimed that this climate influenced the apolitical nature of the film, which allowed for many different political interpretations.[88]Burton points out that many conservative critics and magazines (John Simon, James Bowman, the World Report) initially either criticized the film or praised it only for its non-political elements. Only after the popularity of the film was well-established did conservatives embrace the film as an affirmation of traditional values. Burton implies that the liberal-left could have prevented the conservatives from claiming rights to the film, had it chosen to vocalize elements of the film such as its criticism of military values. Instead, the liberal-left focused on what the film omitted, such as the feminist and civil rights movements.[88]Some commentators see the conservative readings of Forrest Gump as indicants of the death of irony in American culture. Vivian Sobchack notes that the film's humor and irony relies on the assumption of the audience's historical (self-) consciousness.[88]The 32-song soundtrack from the film was released on July 6, 1994. With the exception of a lengthy suite from Alan Silvestri's score, all the songs are previously released; the soundtrack includes songs from Elvis Presley, Fleetwood Mac, Creedence Clearwater Revival, Aretha Franklin, Lynyrd Skynyrd, Three Dog Night, The Byrds, The Doors, Jimi Hendrix, The Mamas & the Papas, The Doobie Brothers, Simon & Garfunkel, Bob Seger, Buffalo Springfield, and Michael McDonald among others. Music producer Joel Sill reflected on compiling the soundtrack: "We wanted to have very recognizable material that would pinpoint time periods, yet we didn't want to interfere with what was happening cinematically."[89] The two-disc album has a variety of music from the 1950s1980s performed by American artists. According to Sills, this was due to Zemeckis' request, "All the material in there is American. Bob (Zemeckis) felt strongly about it. He felt that Forrest wouldn't buy anything but American."[89]The soundtrack reached a peak of second place on the Billboard charts.[89] The soundtrack went on to sell twelvemillion copies, and is one of the top selling albums in the United States.[90] The score for the film was composed and conducted by Alan Silvestri and released on August 2, 1994.The screenplay for the sequel was written by Eric Roth in 2001. It is based on the original novel's sequel, Gump and Co. that was written by Winston Groom in 1995. Roth's script begins with Forrest sitting on a bench waiting for his son to return from school. After the September 11 attacks, Roth, Zemeckis, and Hanks decided the story was no longer "relevant."[91] In March 2007, however, it was reported that Paramount producers took another look at the screenplay.[92]On the very first page of the sequel novel, Forrest Gump tells readers "Don't never let nobody make a movie of your life's story," though "Whether they get it right or wrong, it doesn't matter."[93] The first chapter of the book suggests that the real-life events surrounding the film have been incorporated into Forrest's storyline, and that Forrest got a lot of media attention as a result of the film.[14] During the course of the sequel novel, Gump runs into Tom Hanks and at the end of the novel is the film's release, including Gump going on The David Letterman Show and attending the Academy Awards. July 6, 1994(1994-07-06)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Script
3.2 Filming
3.3 Visual effects

3.1 Script3.2 Filming3.3 Visual effects4 Release

4.1 Critical reception
4.2 Box office performance
4.3 Home media
4.4 Accolades

4.1 Critical reception4.2 Box office performance4.3 Home media4.4 Accolades5 Author controversy6 Symbolism

6.1 Feather
6.2 Political interpretations

6.1 Feather6.2 Political interpretations7 Soundtrack8 Possible sequel9 References10 External links3.1 Script3.2 Filming3.3 Visual effects4.1 Critical reception4.2 Box office performance4.3 Home media4.4 Accolades6.1 Feather6.2 Political interpretationsTom Hanks as Forrest Gump: though at an early age he is deemed to have a below average IQ of 75, he has endearing character and devotion to his loved ones and duties, which brings him into many life-changing situations. Along the way, he encounters many historical figures and events throughout his life. John Travolta was the original choice to play the title role, and admits passing on the role was a mistake.[4] Bill Murray was also considered for the role.[5] Hanks revealed that he signed onto the film after an hour and a half of reading the script.[6] He initially wanted to ease Forrest's pronounced Southern accent, but was eventually persuaded by director Bob Zemeckis to portray the heavy accent stressed in the novel.[6] Hanks agreed to take the role only on the condition that the film was historically accurate. Michael Conner Humphreys portrayed the young Forrest Gump. Hanks revealed in interviews that after hearing Michael's unique accented drawl, he incorporated it into the older character's accent.Robin Wright as Jenny Curran Gump: Forrests's childhood friend who he quickly falls in love with, and never stops loving throughout his life. Jenny re-enters his life at various times in adulthood. A survivor of child sexual abuse, Jenny embarks on a different path to Forrest, leading a self-destructive life and becoming part of the hippie movement in the 1960s and the 1970s/1980s drug culture. She eventually becomes a waitress in Savannah, Georgia where she lives in an apartment with her (and Forrest's) son, Forrest Jr. They eventually get married, but soon afterwards she dies of an unspecified illness. Hanna R. Hall portrayed the young Jenny.Gary Sinise as Second Lieutenant Dan Taylor: Forrest and Bubba Blue's platoon leader during the Vietnam War, whose ancestors have died in every American war. After losing his legs in an ambush and being rescued against his will by Forrest, he is initially bitter towards Forrest and falls into a deep depression. He later serves as Forrest's first mate at the Bubba Gump Shrimp Company, gives most of the orders, and regains his will to live and ultimately forgives Forrest for his actions in Vietnam and acknowledges that Gump saved his life. By the end of the film, he is engaged to be married and is sporting "magic legs"  titanium alloy prosthetics which allow him to walk again.Mykelti Williamson as Benjamin Buford "Bubba" Blue: Bubba is Forrest's friend whom he meets upon joining the Army. Bubba was originally supposed to be the senior partner in the Bubba Gump Shrimp Company, but due to his death in Vietnam, their platoon leader, Dan Taylor, took his place. The company posthumously carried his name. Forrest later gave Bubba's mother Bubba's share of the business. Throughout filming, Williamson wore a lip attachment to create Bubba's protruding lip.[7] David Alan Grier, Ice Cube and Dave Chappelle were all offered the role before turning it down.[5][8] Chappelle claimed he believed the film would be unsuccessful and has also admitted that he regrets not taking the role.[5]Sally Field as Mrs. Gump: Forrest's mother, who raises him after his father abandons them. Field reflected on the character, "She's a woman who loves her son unconditionally. ... A lot of her dialogue sounds like slogans, and that's just what she intends."[9]Haley Joel Osment as Forrest Gump, Jr.: Forrest and Jenny's son. Osment was cast in the film after the casting director had noticed him in a Pizza Hut commercial.[10]Peter Dobson as Elvis: a house guest Forrest encounters. Although Kurt Russell was uncredited, he provided the voice over for Elvis in the scene where Elvis meets Forrest.[11]Dick Cavett as himself. Cavett played the 1970s version of himself, with makeup applied to make him appear younger. Consequently, Cavett is the only well-known figure in the film to play a cameo role rather than be represented through the use of archival footage.[12]Sam Anderson as Principal Hancock: Forrest's elementary school principal.Geoffrey Blake as Wesley: A member of the SDS group and Jenny's abusive boyfriend.Siobhan Fallon Hogan as Dorothy Harris: The school bus driver who drives both Forrest, and later his son, to school.Sonny Shroyer as Coach Paul "Bear" Bryant: Forrest's football coach of the University of Alabama.Grand L. Bush, Conor Kennelly, and Teddy Lane Jr. as the Black Panthers: Members of an organization that protests against the Vietnam War, President Lyndon B. Johnson, and anti-black racism.AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  #71AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs  NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Passions  NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Forrest Gump  Nominated Hero

Forrest Gump  Nominated HeroAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"Mama always said life was like a box of chocolates. You never know what you're gonna get."  #40
"Mama says, "Stupid is as stupid does.""  Nominated

"Mama always said life was like a box of chocolates. You never know what you're gonna get."  #40"Mama says, "Stupid is as stupid does.""  NominatedAFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers  #37AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #76AFI's 10 Top 10  Nominated Epic FilmForrest Gump  Nominated Hero"Mama always said life was like a box of chocolates. You never know what you're gonna get."  #40"Mama says, "Stupid is as stupid does.""  NominatedForrest Gump at the Internet Movie DatabaseForrest Gump at the TCM Movie DatabaseForrest Gump at AllRoviForrest Gump at Box Office MojoForrest Gump at Rotten TomatoesSaving Private Ryan is a 1998 American epic war film set during and following the invasion of Normandy in World War II. It was directed by Steven Spielberg and written by Robert Rodat. Noted for its graphic and realistic portrayal of war, the film is especially notable for the intensity of its opening 27 minutes, which depicts the Omaha Beach assault of June 6, 1944. Afterwards, it follows United States Army Rangers Captain John H. Miller (played by Tom Hanks) and seven other soldiers (Tom Sizemore, Edward Burns, Barry Pepper, Vin Diesel, Giovanni Ribisi, Adam Goldberg and Jeremy Davies) as they search for a paratrooper, Private First Class James Francis Ryan (Matt Damon), who is the last-surviving brother of four servicemen.Rodat conceived the film's story in 1994 when he saw a monument dedicated to eight siblings killed in the American Civil War. Rodat imagined a similar sibling narrative set in World War II. The script was submitted to producer Mark Gordon, who handed it to Hanks. It was finally given to Spielberg, who decided to direct.Saving Private Ryan was well received by audiences and garnered considerable critical acclaim, winning several awards for film, cast, and crew as well as earning significant returns at the box office. The film grossed US$481.8 million worldwide, making it the highest-grossing domestic film of the year. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences nominated the film for eleven Academy Awards; Spielberg's direction won him a second Academy Award for Best Director. Saving Private Ryan was released on home video in May 1999, earning $44 million from sales.On the morning of June 6, 1944, the beginning of the Normandy invasion, American soldiers prepare to land on Omaha Beach. They struggle against dug-in German infantry, machine gun nests, and artillery fire, which cut down many of the men. Captain John H. Miller, the company commander of Charlie Company, 2nd Ranger Battalion, survives the initial landing and assembles a group of soldiers to penetrate the German defenses, leading to a breakout from the beach.In the United States Department of War in Washington, D.C., General George Marshall is informed that three of four brothers in the Ryan family have all died within days of each other and that their mother will receive all three telegrams on the same day. He learns that the fourth son, Private First Class James Francis Ryan of Baker Company, 506th Parachute Infantry Regiment, 101st Airborne Division is missing in action somewhere in Normandy. After reading to his staff Abraham Lincoln's letter to Mrs. Bixby, Marshall orders that Ryan be found and sent home immediately.In France, three days after D-Day, Miller receives orders to find Ryan. He assembles six men from his company (Horvath, Mellish, Reiben, Jackson, Wade, and Caparzo), plus one detailed from the 29th Infantry Division (Upham), a clerk who speaks fluent French and German, to accomplish the task. With no information about Ryan's whereabouts, Miller and his men move out to Neuville. On the outskirts of Neuville they meet a platoon from the 101st. After entering the town under heavy rain, Caparzo is wounded by a sniper in the chest, and slowly bleeds to death, since nobody can go out into the open without getting hit. Jackson is able to kill the sniper after Caparzo dies. They locate a Private James Frederick Ryan from Minnesota, but soon realize that he's not their man. They find a member of Charlie Company, 506th, who informs them that his drop zone was at Vierville and that Baker and Charlie companies had the same rally point. Once they reach it, Miller locates a friend of Ryan's, who reveals that Ryan is defending a strategically important bridge over the Merderet River in the town of Ramelle.On the way to Ramelle, Miller decides to take the opportunity to neutralize a small German machine gun position close to an abandoned radar station, despite the misgivings of his men. Wade, their medic, is fatally wounded in the ensuing skirmish. The last surviving German, known only as "Steamboat Willie", incurs the wrath of all the squad members except Upham, who protests to Miller about the proposed execution of the German soldier. "Steamboat Willie" pleads for his life and Miller decides to let him walk away, blindfolded, and surrender himself to the next Allied patrol. Viewing Miller's decision as letting the enemy go free, and no longer confident in Miller's leadership, Reiben declares his intention to desert the squad and the mission, prompting a confrontation with Horvath. The argument heats up, until Miller defuses the situation by revealing his pre-war occupation as an English teacher, a question upon which the squad had set up a betting pool. Reiben then reluctantly decides to stay.The squad finally arrives on the outskirts of Ramelle, where they come upon three paratroopers ambushing a German half-track. Among the paratroopers is Ryan. After entering Ramelle, Ryan is told of his brothers' deaths, and their mission to bring him home, and that two lives had been lost in the quest to find him. He is distressed at the loss of his brothers, but does not feel it is fair to go home, asking Miller to tell his mother "when you found me I was here, I was with the only brothers I have left," looking at the small band whose duty it was to defend a bridge and destroy an approaching German mechanized unit. Miller decides to take command and defend the bridge with what little manpower and resources are available.The Germans arrive in force with more than 50 men supported by armor. In spite of inflicting heavy German casualties and destroying two tanks with sticky bombs (explosives stuffed into socks and then coated with axle grease), most of the Americansincluding Jackson, Mellish, and Horvathare killed. While attempting to blow the bridge, Miller is shot and mortally wounded. Just before a Tiger reaches the bridge, an American P-51 Mustang flies over and destroys it, followed by more Mustangs and advancing American infantry and M4 Sherman tanks who rout the remaining Germans. Upham, who was cut off from the Americans and hid in a ditch next to the advancing Germans, comes out of hiding as the Germans flee and orders them to drop their weapons. The Germans comply but Upham summarily executes "Steamboat Willie" when the latter recognizes him. Ryan, Reiben, and Upham are the only surviving Americans of the battle. Ryan is with Miller as he dies and says his last words, "James... earn this. Earn it."In the present day, Ryan, now an elderly veteran, and his family visit the Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial at Colleville-sur-mer; Normandy, France. Ryan stands at Miller's grave. He asks his wife to confirm that he has led a good life and that he is a "good man" and thus worthy of the sacrifice of Miller and the others. He then salutes Miller's grave.In 1994, Robert Rodat saw a monument in Putney Corners, New Hampshire, memorializing those who were killed from the Civil War to Vietnam. He noticed the names of eight siblings who died during the American Civil War. Inspired by the story, Rodat did some research and decided to write a similar story set in World War II. Rodat's script was submitted to producer Mark Gordon, who liked the story but only accepted the text after 11 redrafts. Gordon shared the finished script with Hanks, who liked it and in turn passed it along to Spielberg to direct. A shooting date was set for June 27, 1997.[3] Before filming began, several of the film's stars, including Edward Burns, Barry Pepper, Vin Diesel, Adam Goldberg, Giovanni Ribisi, and Tom Hanks, endured ten days of "boot camp" training and work on the film set to prepare for their roles.[4] Matt Damon was intentionally not brought into the camp, to make the rest of the group feel resentment towards the character.[citation needed]Spielberg had already demonstrated his interest in World War II themes with the films 1941, Empire of the Sun, Schindler's List, and the Indiana Jones series. Spielberg later co-produced the World War II themed television miniseries Band of Brothers and its counterpart The Pacific with Tom Hanks. When asked about this by American Cinematographer, Spielberg said, "I think that World War II is the most significant event of the last 100 years; the fate of the Baby Boomers and even Generation X was linked to the outcome. Beyond that, I've just always been interested in World War II. My earliest films, which I made when I was about 14 years old, were combat pictures that were set both on the ground and in the air. For years now, I've been looking for the right World War II story to shoot, and when Robert Rodat wrote Saving Private Ryan, I found it."[5]The D-Day scenes were shot in Ballinesker Beach, Curracloe Strand, Ballinesker, just east of Curracloe, Wexford, Ireland.[6][7][8] Filming began June 27, 1997, and lasted for two months.[9][10][11] Some shooting was done in Normandy, for the Normandy American Cemetery and Memorial in Colleville-sur-Mer and Calvados. Other scenes were filmed in English locations such as a former British Aerospace factory in Hatfield, Hertfordshire, London, Thame Park, Oxfordshire, and Wiltshire. Production was due to also take place in Seaham, County Durham, but government restrictions disallowed this.[12]Saving Private Ryan has been critically noted for its realistic portrayal of World War II combat. In particular, the sequence depicting the Omaha landings was voted the "best battle scene of all time" by Empire magazine and was ranked number one on TV Guide's list of the "50 Greatest Movie Moments".[13] The scene cost US$12 million and involved up to 1,500 extras, some of whom were members of the Irish Reserve Defence Forces. Members of local reenactment groups such as the Second Battle Group were cast as extras to play German soldiers.[14] In addition, twenty to thirty actual amputees were used to portray US soldiers maimed during the landing.[15] Spielberg did not storyboard the sequence, as he wanted spontaneous reactions and for "the action to inspire me as to where to put the camera".[16]The historical representation of Charlie Company's actions, led by its commander, Captain Ralph E. Goranson, was well maintained in the opening sequence. The sequence and details of the events are very close to the historical record, including the seasickness experienced by many of the soldiers as the landing craft moved toward the shoreline, significant casualties among the men as they disembarked from the boats, and difficulty linking up with adjacent units on the shore. The contextual details of the Company's actions were well maintained, for instance, the correct code names for the sector Charlie Company assaulted, and adjacent sectors were used. Included in the cinematic depiction of the landing was a follow on mission of clearing a bunker and trench system at the top of the cliffs which was not part of the original mission objectives for Charlie Company, but which they did undertake after climbing the cliffs at Pointe du Hoc.[17]The landing craft used included twelve actual World War II examples, 10 LCVPs and 2 LCMs, standing in for the British LCAs that the Ranger Companies rode in to the beach during Operation Overlord.[17][18] The film-makers used underwater cameras to better depict soldiers being hit by bullets in the water. Forty barrels of fake blood were used to simulate the effect of blood in the seawater.[15] This degree of realism was more difficult to achieve when depicting World War II German armored vehicles, as few examples survive in operating condition. The Tiger I tanks in the film were copies built on the chassis of old, but functional Soviet T-34 tanks.[19] The two vehicles described in the film as Panzers were meant to portray Marder III tank destroyers. One was created for the film using the chassis of a Czech-built Panzer 38(t) tank[20] similar to the construction of the original Marder III; the other was a cosmetically modified Swedish SAV m/43 assault gun, which also used the 38(t) chassis.[21]Inevitably, some artistic license was taken by the filmmakers for the sake of drama. One of the most notable is the depiction of the 2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich, as the adversary during the fictional Battle of Ramelle. The 2nd SS was not engaged in Normandy until July, and then at Caen against the British and Canadians, one hundred miles east.[22] Furthermore, the Merderet River bridges were not an objective of the 101st Airborne Division but of the 82nd Airborne Division, part of Mission Boston.[23] Much has been said about various "tactical errors" made by both the German and American forces in the film's climactic battle. Spielberg responded, saying that in many scenes he opted to replace sound military tactics and strict historical accuracy for dramatic effect.[24]To achieve a tone and quality that was true to the story as well as reflected the period in which it is set, Spielberg once again collaborated with cinematographer Janusz Kamiski, saying, "Early on, we both knew that we did not want this to look like a Technicolor extravaganza about World War II, but more like color newsreel footage from the 1940s, which is very desaturated and low-tech." Kamiski had the protective coating stripped from the camera lenses, making them closer to those used in the 1940s. He explains that "without the protective coating, the light goes in and starts bouncing around, which makes it slightly more diffused and a bit softer without being out of focus." The cinematographer completed the overall effect by putting the negative through bleach bypass, a process that reduces brightness and color saturation. The shutter timing was set to 90 or 45 degrees for many of the battle sequences, as opposed to the standard of 180 degree timing. Kamiski clarifies, "In this way, we attained a certain staccato in the actors' movements and a certain crispness in the explosions, which makes them slightly more realistic."[25]The film was distributed by DreamWorks in North America and by Paramount Pictures internationally. As a result of Paramount's 2005 acquisition of DreamWorks, Paramount has gained North America distribution rights as well (though still through the DreamWorks division). Saving Private Ryan was a critical and commercial success and is credited with contributing to a resurgence in America's interest in World War II. Old and new films, video games, and novels about the war enjoyed renewed popularity after its release.[26] The film's use of desaturated colors, hand-held cameras, and tight angles has profoundly influenced subsequent films and video games.[27][28] Saving Private Ryan was released in 2,463 theaters on July 28, 1998, and grossed $30.5 million on its opening weekend. The film grossed $216.5 million in North America and $265.3 million on other territories, bringing its worldwide total to $481.8 million and making it the highest grossing domestic film of the year.[1]Critical reception for the film was highly positive, with much praise for the realistic battle scenes[29] and the actors' performances,[30] but earning some criticism for ignoring the contributions of several other countries to the D-Day landings in general and at Omaha Beach specifically.[31] The most direct example of the latter is that during the actual landing the 2nd Rangers disembarked from British ships and were taken to Omaha Beach by Royal Navy landing craft (LCAs). The film depicts them as being United States Coast Guard-crewed craft (LCVPs and LCMs) from an American ship, the USS Thomas Jefferson (APA-30).[17][32][33] This criticism was far from universal with other critics recognizing the director's intent to make an "American" film.[34] The film was not released in Malaysia after Spielberg refused to cut the violent scenes;[35] however, the film was finally released there on DVD with an 18SG certificate much later in 2005. It currently scores 93% "Certified Fresh" on Rotten Tomatoes[36] and 90% on Metacritic,[37] two film review aggregate sites. Many critics associations, such as New York Critics Circle and Los Angeles Film Critics Association, chose Saving Private Ryan as Film of the Year.[38] Roger Ebert gave it four stars out of four and called it "a powerful experience".[30]Filmmaker Quentin Tarantino has expressed admiration for the film and has cited it as an influence on his 2009 war epic, Inglourious Basterds.[39] In an interview, Tarantino told interviewer Samuel Blumenfeld, "Spielberg is doing something unheard of with the opening of this movie. When you watch the sequence of the landing, its no longer possible to look the same way at The Longest Day, or even Samuel Fuller's The Big Red One... Saving Private Ryan made me aware of some issues raised by the cinema of war that I was unable to ask on my own. The idea that forty men on a boat are exterminated in seconds by a volley of machine gun fire is terrifying. Can you imagine the most atrocious carnage? Obviously, yes. Except that throughout the scene, you are persuaded to attend the worst slaughter in history. The sequence of the knife fight between a U.S. soldier and a Nazi at the end of the film is also as notable as the landing. I hate war movies where they show a soldier killing his opponents without sweating, as if it were insignificant. If I was fighting to save my skin, I think it would be a little more difficult. It's hard to kill someone, it takes sweat, and even with this, you have no guarantee of reaching your goals. Spielberg managed admirably to stage this scene with that dimension."[40]Filmmaker Oliver Stone, however, has accused the film of promoting "the worship of World War II as the good war," and has lumped it alongside films such as Gladiator and Black Hawk Down that he believes were well-made, but may have inadvertently contributed to Americans' readiness for the 2003 invasion of Iraq.[41] In defense of the film's portrait of warfare, filmmaker Brian De Palma commented, "The level of violence in something like Saving Private Ryan makes sense because Spielberg is trying to show something about the brutality of what happened."[42]The actor Richard Todd, who performed in The Longest Day and was amongst the first of the Allied soldiers to land in Normandy, said the film was "Rubbish. Overdone."[43] Other WWII veterans, however, stated that the film was the most realistic depiction of combat they had ever seen.[44] The film was so realistic that combat veterans of D-Day and Vietnam left theaters rather than finish watching the opening scene depicting the Normandy invasion. Their visits to posttraumatic stress disorder counselors rose in number after the film's release, and many counselors advised "'more psychologically vulnerable'" veterans to avoid watching it.[45]The film was later nominated for eleven Academy Awards, with wins for Best Cinematography, Best Sound, Best Sound Effects Editing, Best Film Editing, and Best Director for Spielberg, but lost the Best Picture award to Shakespeare in Love, being one of a few that have won the Best Director award without also winning Best Picture.[46] The film also won the Golden Globes for Best Picture Drama and Director, the BAFTA Award for Special Effects and Sound, the Directors Guild of America Award, a Grammy Award for Best Film Soundtrack, the Producers Guild of America Golden Laurel Award, and the Saturn Award for Best Action/Adventure/Thriller Film.[38] In June 2008, the American Film Institute revealed its "Ten Top Ten"the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genresafter polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. Saving Private Ryan was listed as the eighth best film in the "epic films" genre.[47]American Film Institute ListsThe film debuted on home video in May 1999 with a VHS release that earned over $44 million. A later special edition, the D-Day 60th Anniversary Commemorative Edition, was released featuring an extra tape with documentary footage of the actual D-Day landings as well as the making of the film.[50] The DVD was released in November of the same year,[51] and was one of the best-selling titles of the year, with over 1.5 million units sold.[52] The original DVD was released in two separate versions: one with Dolby Digital and the other with DTS 5.1 surround sound. Besides the different 5.1 tracks, the two DVDs are identical. The film was also issued in a very limited 2-disc Laserdisc release in November 1999, making it one of the very last feature films to ever be issued in this format, as Laserdiscs ceased manufacturing and distribution by the year's end, due in part to the growing popularity of DVDs.[53] In 2004, a Saving Private Ryan special edition DVD was released to commemorate the 60th anniversary of D-Day. This two-disc edition was also included in a box set titled World War II Collection, along with two documentaries produced by Spielberg, Price For Peace (about the Pacific War) and Shooting War (about war photographers, narrated by Tom Hanks).[54] The film was released on Blu-ray Disc on April 26, 2010 in the UK and on May 4, 2010 in the US, as part of Paramount Home Video's premium Sapphire Series.[55] However, only weeks after its release, Paramount issued a recall due to audio synchronization problems.[56] The studio issued an official statement acknowledging the problem, which they attributed to an authoring error by Technicolor that escaped the quality control process, and that they had already begun the process of replacing the defective discs.[57] The remastered discs were released to the public on May 18, 2010.On Veterans Day from 20012004, the American Broadcasting Company aired the film uncut and with limited commercial interruption. The network airings were given a TV-MA rating, as the violent battle scenes and the profanity were left intact. The 2004 airing was marred by pre-emptions in many markets because of the language, in the backlash of Super Bowl XXXVIII's halftime show controversy.[58] However, critics and veterans' groups such as the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars assailed those stations and their owners, including Hearst-Argyle Television (owner of 14 ABC affiliates); Scripps Howard Broadcasting (owner of ten); and Belo (the owner of four) for putting profits ahead of programming and honoring those who gave their lives at wartime, saying the stations made more money running their own programming instead of being paid by the network to carry the film, especially during a sweeps period. A total of 65 ABC affiliates28% of the networkdid not clear the available timeslot for the film, even with the offer of The Walt Disney Company, ABC's parent, to pay all fines for language to the Federal Communications Commission.[59] In the end, however, no complaints were lodged against ABC affiliates who showed Ryan, perhaps because even conservative watchdogs like the Parents Television Council supported the unedited rebroadcast of the film.[60]From 2005present, TNT acquired the rights to air the film, usually airing it as ABC did on Veterans Day, complete and limited commercials. Currently, the film can be seen (as of 2010) in syndication and also on Turner Classic Movies.[citation needed]Ian BryceMark GordonGary LevinsohnSteven SpielbergTom HanksEdward BurnsMatt DamonTom SizemoreAmblin EntertainmentMark Gordon ProductionsMutual Film CompanyDreamWorks (US)Paramount Pictures (non-US)July 24, 1998(1998-07-24)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Portraying history

3.1 Development3.2 Portraying history4 Release

4.1 Reception
4.2 Awards
4.3 Home media
4.4 Television broadcasts

4.1 Reception4.2 Awards4.3 Home media4.4 Television broadcasts5 See also6 References

6.1 Notes
6.2 Further reading

6.1 Notes6.2 Further reading7 External links3.1 Development3.2 Portraying history4.1 Reception4.2 Awards4.3 Home media4.4 Television broadcasts6.1 Notes6.2 Further readingTom Hanks as Captain John H. MillerTom Sizemore as Technical Sergeant Mike HorvathEdward Burns as Private First Class Richard Reiben, an automatic riflemanBarry Pepper as Private Daniel Jackson, a sniperAdam Goldberg as Private Stanley "Fish" Mellish, a riflemanVin Diesel as Private First Class Adrian CaparzoGiovanni Ribisi as Technician Fourth Grade Irwin Wade, a medicJeremy Davies as Technician Fifth Grade Timothy E. Upham, a cartographerMatt Damon as Private First Class James Francis Ryan, a paratrooperTed Danson as Captain Fred Hamill, a pathfinderPaul Giamatti as Staff Sergeant William Hill, a paratrooperDennis Farina as Lieutenant Colonel Walter AndersonHarrison Young as James Francis Ryan, present dayKathleen Byron as Mrs. Ryan, present dayHarve Presnell as General George C. Marshall, Chief of Staff of the United States ArmyLeland Orser as Second Lieutenant DeWindt, pilot of a crashed gliderBryan Cranston as Colonel I. W. Bryce, an officer at the War DepartmentDale Dye as an officer at the War DepartmentNathan Fillion as Private James Frederick RyanMax Martini as Corporal Fred Henderson, ranking NCO paratrooper at RamelleDemetri Goritsas as Private Parker, a paratrooperJoerg Stadler as "Steamboat Willie", a German soldierAFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills #45AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Captain John H. Miller Nominated Hero[48]

Captain John H. Miller Nominated Hero[48]AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"Earn this." Nominated[49]

"Earn this." Nominated[49]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers #10AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #71AFI's 10 Top 10 #8 Epic filmCaptain John H. Miller Nominated Hero[48]"Earn this." Nominated[49]Saving Private Ryan (soundtrack)1998 in filmCinema of the United StatesList of American films of 1998List of World War II filmsKershaw, Alex (May 11, 2004). The Bedford Boys: One American Town's Ultimate D-day Sacrifice. Da Capo Press. ISBN0-306-81355-6.Lefebvre, Laurent (September 2008). 29th Division ... a division of heroes. American d-Day. ISBN2-9519963-9-X. http://www.americandday.org/.Lefebvre, Laurent (June 1, 2004). They Were on Omaha Beach. American d-Day. ISBN2-9519963-5-7. http://www.americandday.org/.Saving Private Ryan at the Internet Movie DatabaseSaving Private Ryan at AllRoviSaving Private Ryan at Box Office MojoSaving Private Ryan at Rotten TomatoesAmerican D-day29th Infantry Division Historical SocietyOmaha Beach at Encyclopdia BritannicaBen-Hur is a 1959 American epic historical drama film set in ancient Rome, directed by William Wyler and starring Charlton Heston, Stephen Boyd, Jack Hawkins, Hugh Griffith and Haya Harareet. It won a record 11 Academy Awards, including Best Picture, an accomplishment that was not equalled until Titanic in 1997 and The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King in 2003.A remake of the 1925 silent film with the same name, Ben Hur was adapted from Lew Wallace's 1880 novel Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ. The screenplay is credited to Karl Tunberg but includes contributions from Maxwell Anderson, S. N. Behrman, Gore Vidal, and Christopher Fry. The motion picture was the most expensive ever made at the time, and its sets were the largest yet built for a film. The picture contains a nine-minute chariot race which has become one of the most famous sequences in cinema. The score composed by Mikls Rzsa was highly influential on cinema for more than 15 years, and is the longest ever composed for a motion picture.In AD 26, Judah Ben-Hur (Charlton Heston) is a wealthy prince and merchant in Jerusalem. His childhood friend, the Roman citizen Messala (Stephen Boyd), is now a tribune. After several years away from Jerusalem, Messala returns as the new commander of the Roman garrison. Messala believes in the glory of Rome and its imperial power, while Ben-Hur is devoted to his faith and the freedom of the Jewish people. Messala asks Ben-Hur for the names of Jews who criticize the Romans. Ben-Hur refuses.Ben-Hur lives with his mother, Miriam (Martha Scott), and sister, Tirzah (Cathy O'Donnell). Their loyal slave Simonides (Sam Jaffe) is preparing for an arranged marriage for his daughter, Esther (Haya Harareet). Ben-Hur gives Esther her freedom as a wedding present, and the audience is shown that Ben-Hur and Esther are in love even though her marriage to another man is imminent.During the parade for the new governor of Judea, Valerius Gratus, a tile falls from the roof of Ben-Hur's house. Gratus is thrown from his horse and nearly killed. Although Messala knows this was an accident, he condemns Ben-Hur to the galleys and imprisons Miriam and Tirzah. By punishing a known friend and prominent citizen, he hopes to intimidate the Jewish populace. Ben-Hur swears to take revenge. Dying of thirst when his slave gang arrives at Nazareth, Ben-Hur collapses. But a local carpenter (who the audience realizes is Jesus) gives him water.After three years as a galley slave, Ben-Hur is assigned to the flagship of the Roman Consul Quintus Arrius (Jack Hawkins), who has been charged with destroying a fleet of Macedonian pirates. Arrius admires Ben-Hur's self-discipline and offers to train him as a gladiator or charioteer. Ben-Hur declines the offer, declaring that God will aid him in his quest for vengeance.The Roman fleet encounters the Macedonians. Arrius orders all the rowers except Ben-Hur to be chained to their benches. Arrius' galley is rammed and sunk, but Ben-Hur unchains the other rowers, and saves Arrius' life. Arrius believes the battle ended in defeat, but Ben-Hur prevents him from committing suicide. Ben-Hur and Arrius are rescued, and Arrius is credited with the Roman fleet's victory. The consul successfully petitions Emperor Tiberius (George Relph) to free Ben-Hur, and adopts him as his son. Several years pass off-screen. Now wealthy, Ben-Hur learns Roman ways and becomes a champion charioteer, but longs for his family and homeland.Ben-Hur returns to Judea. Along the way, he meets Balthasar (Finlay Currie) and an Arab sheik, Ilderim (Hugh Griffith). The sheik has heard of Ben-Hur's prowess as a charioteer, and asks him to drive his quadriga in a race before the new Judean governor Pontius Pilate (Frank Thring). Ben-Hur declines, even after he learns that champion charioteer Messala will also compete.Ben-Hur returns to his home in Jerusalem. He meets Esther, and learns her arranged marriage did not occur and that she is still in love with him. He visits Messala and demands his mother and sister's freedom. The Romans discover that Miriam and Tirzah contracted leprosy in prison, and expel them from the city. The women beg Esther to conceal their condition from Ben-Hur, so she tells him that his mother and sister died. It is then that he changes his mind and decides to seek vengeance on Messala by competing against him in the chariot race.During the chariot race, Messala drives a chariot with blades on the hubs to tear apart competing vehicles. In the violent and grueling race, Messala attempts to destroy Ben-Hur's chariot but destroys his own instead. Messala is mortally injured, while Ben-Hur wins the race. Before dying, Messala tells Ben-Hur that "the race is not over" and that he can find his family "in the Valley of the Lepers, if you can recognize them." Ben-Hur visits the nearby leper colony, where (hidden from their view) he sees his mother and sister.Esther hears Jesus preach the Sermon on the Mount, and tells Ben-Hur about the message of peace and forgiveness she heard. Blaming Roman rule for his family's fate, Ben-Hur rejects his patrimony and Roman citizenship. Learning that Tirzah is dying, Ben-Hur and Esther take her and Miriam to see Jesus, but the trial of Jesus before Pontius Pilate has begun. Jesus begins his march to Calvary and stumbles before Ben-Hur. Recognizing Jesus from their earlier meeting, Ben-Hur attempts to give him water but guards separate them.Ben-Hur witnesses the crucifixion of Jesus. Miriam and Tirzah are miraculously healed. Ben-Hur tells Esther that he heard Jesus talk of forgiveness while on the cross, and says "I felt His voice take the sword out of my hand."MGM originally announced a remake of Ben-Hur in December 1952, ostensibly as a way to spend its Italian assets.[1][2] Stewart Granger and Robert Taylor were reported to be in the running for the lead.[2] Nine months later, MGM announced it would make the film in CinemaScope, with shooting beginning in 1954.[3] In November 1953, MGM announced it had assigned producer Sam Zimbalist to the picture and hired screenwriter Karl Tunberg to write it.[4] Zimbalist was chosen because he had produced MGM's Best Picture-nominated Christians-and-lions epic Quo Vadis in 1951. The studio then announced in July 1954 that production would start in March 1955 with 42 speaking parts and 97 sets.[5] MGM said Sidney Franklin would direct, that the script by Tunberg was finished, that shooting would occur in Rome and in Spain, and that Marlon Brando was up for the lead.[6] But production didn't start. In fact, in September 1955, Zimbalist (who still claimed a script by Tunberg was finished) said a $7 million, six-to-seven month production would begin in April 1956 in either Israel or Egypt in MGM's new 65mm widescreen process.[7] But MGM suspended production in early 1956.[8]By the late 1950s, court decisions forcing movie studios to divest themselves of theater chains[9] and the competitive pressure of television had caused significant financial distress at MGM.[10] In a gamble to save the studio, and inspired by the success of Paramount Pictures' 1956 Biblical epic The Ten Commandments,[10] studio head Joseph Vogel announced in 1957 that MGM would again move forward on a remake of Ben-Hur.[11] Filming started in May 1958 and wrapped in January 1959, and post-production took six months.[12] Although the budget for Ben-Hur was initially $7 million,[13] it was reported to be $10 million by February 1958.[14] It reached $15 million by the time shooting beganmaking it the costliest film ever produced up to that time.[15] When adjusted for inflation, the budget of Ben Hur was approximately $120million in constant dollars.[16]One notable change in the film involved the opening titles. Concerned that a roaring Leo the Lion (the MGM mascot) would create the wrong mood for the sensitive and sacred nativity scene, Wyler received permission to replace the traditional logo with one in which Leo the Lion is quiet.[17] It was the first time in MGM history that the lion logo was not seen roaring.[17]Lew Wallace's novel ran to about 550 pages. Zimbalist hired a number of screenwriters to cut the story down and turn the novel into a script. According to Gore Vidal, more than 12 versions of the script had been written by various writers by the spring of 1958.[18] Vidal himself had been asked to write a version of the script in 1957, refused, and been placed on suspension for his decision.[18] Karl Tunberg was one of the last writers to work on the script. Zimbalist had initially chosen director Sidney Franklin to helm the picture,[13] and Tunberg consulted with Franklin about the script.[19] Tunberg cut out everything in the book after the crucifixion of Jesus, omitted the sub-plot in which Ben-Hur fakes his death and raises a Jewish army to overthrow the Romans, and altered the manner in which the leperous women are healed (instead of being healed as Christ carries His cross, the women are healed after accidentally soaking in rainwater stained by the blood of Jesus after the crucifixion).[20] The silent film version had introduced Esther early in the picture, rather than midway as in the novel, and Tunberg retained this feature in his script as well.[21] But Zimbalist was unhappy with Tunberg's script, and felt it was "pedestrian"[20] and "unshootable".[22]The writing effort changed direction when Franklin fell ill and was removed from the production.[13] Zimbalist offered the project to William Wyler in early 1957.[23] At first, Wyler refused. Zimbalist asked him to read Tunberg's script. Wyler did so, but found the quality "very primitive, elementary" and no better than hack work.[24] It lacked good characterization, the dramatic structure was poor, and the leads were uninteresting (just "villains and heroes").[24] Wyler expressed interest in the spectacle, however, and especially the chariot race sequence (which was not described in the script). Zimbalist showed Wyler some preliminary storyboards for the chariot race. Wyler, who had been one of 30 Assistant Directors on the 1925 film,[25] began to express an interest in the picture. But Zimbalist told Wyler, "Forget the chariot race. That's just second-unit stuff."[26] Zimbalist said that the real challenge would be to give the picture some "body, depth, intimacy"all things only William Wyler could bring to the picture, and for which (Zimbalist said) Wyler was renowned. Zimbalist also told Wyler that MGM would spend up to $10 million on the film, and Wyler (impressed with the large budget) agreed to review the script a second time.[26] The more Wyler thought about the story, the more he became intrigued with its possibilities.[10] But, according to a report in the New York Times, Wyler refused to take the job until he was sure he had a good leading man. So MGM allowed Wyler to start casting. In April 1957, mainstream media outlets reported that Wyler was giving screen tests to Italian leading men, such as Cesare Danova.[27]By June 13, 1957, MGM was still declining to confirm that Wyler had been hired to direct.[28] Yet, production was due to start, the studio said, in March 1958.[28] In fact, despite conducting screen tests and engaging in other pre-production work for Ben-Hur, Wyler did not agree to direct the film until September 1957,[26] and MGM did not announced his hiring until January 3, 1958.[29] Even though he still lacked a leading man, Wyler took the assignment for many reasons: He was promised a base salary of $350,000 as well as 8 percent of the gross box office (or 3 percent of the net profits, whichever was greater),[30] and he wanted to work in Rome again (where he had filmed Roman Holiday).[10][13] His base salary was, at the time, the largest ever paid to a director for a single film.[10] But professional competitive reasons also played a role in his decision to direct. Wyler later admitted that he wished to "out DeMille DeMille"[13] and make a "thinking man's" Biblical epic.[31] In later years, William Wyler would joke that it took a Jew to make a good movie about Christ.[32]Wyler, like Zimbalist, was also unhappy with the script. He felt Tunberg's draft was too much of a morality play overlaid with current Western political overtones, and that the dialogue was too modern-sounding.[33] Zimbalist brought in playwright S. N. Behrman and then playwright Maxwell Anderson to write drafts.[13] Behrman spent about a month working on the script, but how much he contributed to the final version is unclear.[22] Both a contemporary account in the British magazine Films and Filmmaking as well as Vidal biographer Fred Kaplan claim that Anderson was ill and unable to work on the script.[19][22] But the New York Times reported in June 1957 that Anderson was at work on the script.[28] (The newspaper would later informally retract this statement, and admit in 1959 that Anderson had been too ill to do any writing.)[34] Gore Vidal said that, by spring 1958, the script largely reflected Anderson and Behrman's work and nearly all the dialogue was in Anderson's "elevated poetic style."[18] Kaplan describes the script at this point as having only a "modest to minimal" understanding of what the ancient Roman world was like, dialogue which veered "between flat Americanisms and stilted formality", and an ill-defined relationship between Judah Ben-Hur and Messala.[35]There is confusion in published sources about the next writer to work on the script. Films and Filmmaking magazine, a source contemporary with the picture, claims that British poet and playwright Christopher Fry was brought in next. Fry crafted some critical scenes, the magazine said, and then left the filmat which point Vidal was brought in to finish the script.[19] However, most sources (including Vidal himself) state that Vidal followed Anderson, and that Fry did not come aboard until Vidal was close to leaving the picture. Vidal biographer Fred Kaplan states that Fry was hired simultaneously with Vidal, and that Zimbalist knew Vidal would be able to work on the script for only a short time. Zimbalist hoped that Fry would begin work on the end of the script and that the two writers would "expeditiously meet in the middle. Somewhere about the halfway point they would sink the golden spike."[36] Vidal was hired as a screenwriter because Zimbalist liked him and was very confident in his skills.[35] Vidal said that preproduction on the film was already under way in Italy when he flew to Rome in early March 1958 to meet with Wyler.[18][37] Vidal claimed that Wyler had not read the script, and that when he did so (at Vidal's urging) on his flight from the U.S. to Italy, he was upset with the modernist dialogue.[18][38] Vidal agreed to work on the script for three months so that he would come off suspension and fulfill his contract with MGM,[13][18] although Zimbalist pushed him to stay throughout the entire production.[36] Vidal was researching a book on the 4th century Roman emperor Julian, and knew a great deal about ancient Rome.[35] Wyler, however, knew almost nothing about the period, and spent most of March having nearly every Hollywood film about ancient Rome flown to him in Italywhere he spent hours screening them.[36]Vidal's working style was to finish a scene and review it with Zimbalist. Once Vidal and Zimbalist had come to agreement, the scene would be passed to Wyler.[36] Vidal said he kept the structure of the Tunberg/Behrman/Anderson script, but rewrote nearly all the dialogue.[39] Vidal admitted to William Morris in March 1959 that Fry rewrote as much as a third of the dialogue which Vidal had added to the first half of the script. Vidal made one structural change which was not revised, however. The Tunberg script had Ben-Hur and Messala reuniting and falling out in a single scene. Vidal broke the scene in two, so that the men first reunite at the Castle Antonia and then later argue and end their friendship at Ben-Hur's home. Vidal also added small character touches to the script, such as Ben-Hur's purchase of a brooch for Tirzah and a horse for Messala.[39] Vidal claimed that he worked on the first half of the script (everything up to the chariot race), and scripted 10 versions of the scene where Ben-Hur confronts Messala and begs for his family's freedom.[32][40]Vidal's claim about a homoerotic subtext is hotly debated. Vidal first made the claim in an interview in the 1995 documentary film The Celluloid Closet, and asserted that he persuaded Wyler to direct Stephen Boyd to play the role as if he were a spurned homosexual lover.[41] Vidal said that he believed that Messala's vindictiveness could only be motivated by the feeling of rejection that a lover would feel. Vidal also said he suggested to Wyler that Stephen Boyd be told to play the role that way, and that Heston be kept in the dark about the Messala character's motivations.[32] Vidal further claimed that Wyler took his advice. Whether Vidal wrote the scene in question or had the acting conversation with Wyler, and whether Wyler shot what Vidal wrote, remain issues of debate. In 1980, Wallace biographers Robert and Katharine Morsberger said that Vidal's contribution to the script remained unclear.[20] Heston has asserted that Wyler felt Vidal did not solve the problem of motivation, that Wyler shot little of what Vidal wrote, and that Vidal made little contribution to the script.[32][42] Wyler himself says that he does not remember any conversation about this part of the script or Boyd's acting with Gore Vidal,[32] and that he discarded Vidal's draft in favor of Fry's.[13] Film critic Gary Giddins also dismisses Vidal's claims, concluding that 80 percent of the script had been written "years before" Vidal came aboard the production.[40] But Jan Herman, one of Wyler's biographers, asserts "there is no reason to doubt" Vidal's claim, and that Wyler's inability to remember the conversation was just part of the director's notorious caginess.[32] Vidal questioned Heston's own honesty and claims about Wyler,[42] and asserted that Wyler wanted Vidal and Fry to share credit for the script.[40] Vidal also wrote in March 1959 (decades before the dispute occurred) that he had been on the set and that he personally watched Wyler film everything from the reunion scene to the quarrel (pages 12 to 31 in the script).[39] There appears to be some contemporary support for Vidal's assertions. Morgan Hudgens, publicity director for the film, wrote to Vidal in late May 1958 about the crucial scene, and implied there was a homosexual context: "...the big cornpone [the crew's nickname for Heston] really threw himself into your 'first meeting' scene yesterday. You should have seen those boys embrace!"[43] Film critic F. X. Feeney, in a comparison of script drafts, concludes that Vidal made significant and extensive contributions to the script.[44]The final writer on the film was Christopher Fry. Charlton Heston has claimed that Fry was Wyler's first choice as screenwriter, but that Zimbalist forced him to use Vidal.[32] Whether Fry worked on the script before Vidal or not, sources agree that Fry arrived in Rome in early May 1958 and spent six days a week on the set, writing and rewriting lines of dialogue as well as entire scenes, until the picture was finished.[45] In particular, Fry gave the dialogue a slightly more formal and archaic tone without making it sound stilted and medieval.[45] For example, the sentence "How was your dinner?" became "Was the food not to your liking?"[45] By early June, Fry (working backward from the ending) had finished the screenplay.[46] Film historian Daniel Eagan, however, claims that Fry did not finish the screenplay. Rather, as time went on, Wyler stopped seeking improvements to the script in order to finish the picture.[13]The final script ran 230 pages.[47] The screenplay differed more from the original novel than did the 1925 silent film version. Some changes made the film's storyline more dramatic. Others inserted an admiration for Jewish people (who had founded the state of Israel by this time) and the more pluralistic society of 1950s America rather than the "Christian superiority" view of Wallace's novel.[48]Wyler said that he tried to get Tunberg and Fry co-credit for writing the screenplay. Tunberg initially agreed, Wyler said, but then changed his mind when the Screen Writers' Guild routinely investigated the claim.[49] But according to Gore Vidal and film historian Gary Giddins, Wyler tried to get Fry an unshared credit for the screenplay.[49][50]The dispute over who would receive screen credit quickly became a public one. According to the New York Times, Vidal challenged the initial determination by the Screen Writers' Guild regarding who would receive writing credit for the film.[34] The Screen Writers' Guild arbitrated the credit under its screenwriting credit system, and unanimously awarded full and sole credit for the script to Tunberg (who, coincidentally, was a former president of the Guild).[34][49][51] Both director William Wyler and Sol C. Siegel, head of production at MGM, appealed the Guild's ruling.[34] Tunberg agreed to share credit, but the Guild refused to change its ruling.[34] Wyler publicly campaigned to get Fry screenwriting credit, feeling that insider politics had led the Guild to give Tunberg sole credit. In retaliation, the Guild took out advertisements in trade newspapers accusing Wyler of trying to undermine the integrity of the credit and arbitration system. When Ben-Hur won Academy Awards in a wide range of categories except best screenplay, the Guild then accused Wyler of interfering with Tunberg's nomination. Later, when Charlton Heston accepted his Oscar for Best Leading Actor, he thanked Christopher Fry in his acceptance speech. The Guild sent him a letter which accused Heston of deliberately impugning the Guild and Tunberg's reputation.[49]Many other actors were offered the role of Judah Ben-Hur before it was accepted by Charlton Heston. Burt Lancaster claimed he turned down the role because he found the script boring[52] and belittling to Christianity.[53] Paul Newman turned it down because he said he didn't have the legs to wear a tunic.[54] Marlon Brando,[54] Rock Hudson,[55] Geoffrey Horne,[56] and Leslie Nielsen[57] were also offered the role, as were a number of muscular, handsome Italian actors (many of whom did not speak English).[58] Kirk Douglas was interested in the role, but was turned down in favor of Heston. (This inspired Douglas to make Spartacus a year later.)[59] Heston was formally cast on January 22, 1958.[60] His salary was $250,000 for 30 weeks, a prorated salary for any time over 30 weeks, and travel expenses for his family.[38]Stephen Boyd was cast as the antagonist, Messala, on April 13, 1958.[61] William Wyler originally wanted Heston for the role, but sought another actor after he moved Heston into the role of Judah Ben-Hur.[62] Wyler tried to interest Kirk Douglas in the role of Massala, but Douglas turned him down.[63] Boyd was a contract player at 20th Century Fox when Wyler cast him.[13] Because Heston had blue eyes, Wyler had Boyd outfitted with brown contact lenses as a way of contrasting the two men.[64]Largely speaking, Wyler cast the Romans with British actors and the Jews with American actors to help underscore the divide between the two groups.[15][65] The Romans were the aristocrats in the film, and Wyler believed that American audiences would interpret British accents as patrician.[66] Marie Ney was originally cast as Miriam, but was fired after two days of work because she could not cry on cue.[66][67] Heston says that he was the one who suggested that Wyler cast Martha Scott (who had played the mother of Heston's Moses in The Ten Commandments, and with whom he'd worked on Broadway) as Miriam.[68] Scott was hired on July 17, 1958.[69] Cathy O'Donnell was Wyler's sister-in-law, and although her career was in decline (Ben-Hur would be her last screen performance) Wyler cast her as Tirzah.[70] More than 30 actresses were considered for the role of Esther.[71] The exotically beautiful Israeli actress Haya Harareet, a relative newcomer to film, was cast as Esther on May 16, 1958,[71] after providing a 30-second silent screen test.[72] Wyler had met her at the Cannes Film Festival, where she impressed him with her conversational skills and force of personality.[73] Both Zimbalist and Wyler were excited about her looks and acting.[33] Sam Jaffe was cast as Simonides on April 3, 1958,[74] primarily because he had become famous for his roles as a wise old patriarch in a number of films.[75] Finlay Currie was cast as Balthasar the same day as Jaffe.[74] Wyler had to persuade Jack Hawkins to appear in the film, because Hawkins was unwilling to act in another epic motion picture so soon after The Bridge on the River Kwai.[33] Wyler's efforts at persuasion were successful, and Hawkins was cast on March 18, 1958.[76] Hugh Griffith, who gained acclaim in the post-World War II era in Ealing Studios comedies, was cast as the comical Sheik Ilderim.[77] Finlay Currie had worked with Zimbalist before on Quo Vadis, playing St. Peter, was cast as Balthasar.[78]Out of respect for the divinity of Christ, and consistent with Lew Wallace's stated preference,[79] Wyler decided before the production began that the face of Jesus would not be shown.[80] The role of Jesus was played by Claude Heater. Heater was an American opera singer performing with the Vienna State Opera in Rome when he was asked to do a screen test for the film.[81] He received no credit for his role.In casting, Wyler placed heavy emphasis on characterization rather than looks or acting history.[70] For example, he cast a British actor for the role of the centurion who denies Judah Ben-Hur water at Nazareth. But when the actor held out for more money, the first assistant director selected a different actor. Wyler, who believed the centurion's reaction to his confrontation with Jesus Christ was critical, shut down the production at a cost of $15,000 while the original actor was retrieved from Rome.[82]MGM opened a casting office in Rome in mid-1957 to select the 50,000 individuals who would act in minor roles and as extras in the film.[83] The studio announced that casting for leads in the film was complete on September 12, 1958, when Kamala Devi was cast as Iris, Sheik Ilderim's daughter.[84] However, neither the character nor the actress appeared in the film. A total of 365 actors had speaking parts in the film, although only 45 of them were considered "principal" performers.[85] According to the New York Times, only four of the actors (Heston, O'Donnell, Jaffe, and Scott) had worked in Hollywood.[85]Robert Surtees, who had filmed many of the most successful epics of the 1950s and who had worked with Sam Zimbalist on Quo Vadis in 1951, was hired as cinematographer for the film.[86] Early on in the film's production, Zimbalist and other MGM executives made the decision to film the picture in a widescreen format. Wyler strongly disliked the widescreen format, commenting that "Nothing is out of the picture, and you can't fill it. You either have a lot of empty space, or you have two people talking and a flock of others surrounding them who have nothing to do with the scene. Your eye just wanders out of curiosity."[87] The cameras were also quite large, heavy, and difficult and time-consuming to move.[87] To overcome these difficulties, Surtees and Wyler collaborated on using the widescreen lenses, film stocks, and projection technologies to create highly detailed images for the film. For establishing shots, they planned to show vast lines of marching Roman troops and sailing ships, immense architectural structures lined with thousands of extras, expansive landscapes, and action which moved across the screen.[88] Wyler was best known for composition in depth, a visual technique in which people, props, and architecture are not merely composed horizontally but in depth of field as well. He also had a strong preference for long takes, during which his actors could move within this highly detailed space. But widescreen cinematic technology limited depth of field. Surtees and Wyler worked to overcome this by creating scenes in which one half of the screen is filled with a foreground object while the other half is filled with a background area, and then rack-focusing between the two as the action shifts from foreground to background.[88] Notable instances of this occur when the injured Messala waits for Judah Ben-Hur to appear in the racecourse surgery, when Judah Ben-Hur hides behind a rock to avoid being seen by his mother and sister in the Valley of the Lepers, and during the Sermon on the Mount.[89]The movie was filmed in a process known as "MGM Camera 65". 1957's Raintree County and Ben-Hur were the first MGM films to use the process.[90] The MGM Camera 65 used special 65mm Eastmancolor film stock with a 2.76:1 aspect ratio.[91] 70mm anamorphic camera lenses developed by the Mitchell Camera Company were manufactured to specifications submitted by MGM.[92] These lenses squeezed the image down 1.25 times to fit on the image area of the film stock.[93] The 65mm images were then printed on 70mm film stock.[94] The extra 5mm of space on the film stock allowed the studio to use the new six-track stereo sound, which audiences rarely heard at the time.[95]To make a 35mm print (the type of film stock most smaller theaters could project), a 35mm print with black borders along the top and bottom of each frame was used.[91] When projected, the 2.76:1 aspect ratio was retained.[91] Because the film could be adapted to the requirements of individual theaters, movie houses did not need to install special, expensive 70mm projection equipment.[96] This allowed more theaters to show the film. Six of the 70mm lenses, each worth $100,000, were shipped to Rome for use by the production.[78][97][98]Wyler left the United States for Italy in April 1958, five months before post-production on Wyler's The Big Country was finished. Wyler authorized his long-time editor, Robert Swink, to edit The Big Country as he saw fitincluding the shooting of a new finale, which Swink did.[99] Wyler asked not to be contacted by United Artists over the changes to The Big Country because Ben-Hur would take all his attention, time, and energy. Swink sent him a final cut of the picture in May 1958, which Wyler endorsed.[100]I spent sleepless nights trying to find a way to deal with the figure of Christ. It was a frightening thing when all the great painters of twenty centuries have painted events you have to deal with, events in the life of the best-known man who ever lived. Everyone already has his own concept of him. I wanted to be reverent, and yet realistic. Crucifixion is a bloody, awful, horrible thing, and a man does not go through it with a benign expression on his face. I had to deal with that. It is a very challenging thing to do that and get no complaints from anybody.Principal photography began on May 18, 1958.[51] The script was still unfinished when cinematography began, so that Wyler had only read the first 10 to 12 pages of it.[102] Shooting lasted for 12 to 14 hours a day, six days a week. On Sundays, Wyler would meet with Fry and Zimbalist for story conferences. The pace of the film was so grueling that a doctor was brought onto the set to give a vitamin B complex injection to anyone who requested it (shots which Wyler and his family later suspected may have contained amphetamines).[103] Wyler was unhappy with Heston's performances, feeling they did not make Judah Ben-Hur a plausible character. Wyler shot 16 takes of Heston saying, "I'm a Jew!"[104] By November 1958, the production was becoming bogged down. In part, this was due to the extras. More than 85 percent of the extras had no telephone and no permanent address, so contacting them required using word-of-mouth. It could take several days before all the extras were informed they would be needed. An experienced extra was put in charge of about 30 inexperienced extras, moving them in and out of make-up and wardrobe. On days when there were thousands of extras, individuals would begin getting into costume at 5 A.M., while the last extras would get out of costume around 10 P.M.[83] To speed things up, Wyler often kept principal actors on stand-by, in full costume and make-up, so that he could shoot pick-up scenes if the first unit slowed down. Actresses Martha Scott and Cathy O'Donnell spent almost the entire month of November 1958 in full leprosy make-up and costumes so that Wyler could shoot "leper scenes" when other shots didn't go well.[105] Shooting took nine months, which included three months for the chariot race scene alone.[106]Principal photography ended on January 7, 1959, with filming of the crucifixion scene.[12][107] The sequence took four days to film. Heston said that the final day's shoot was such a "flurry of grab shots" that the conclusion of principal photography was hardly remarked.[101]Italy was MGM's top choice for hosting the production. But a number of countriesincluding France, Mexico, Spain, and the United Kingdomwere also considered.[108] Cinecitt Studios, a very large motion picture production facility constructed in 1937 on the outskirts of Rome, was identified early on as the primary shooting location.[14]Zimbalist hired Wyler's long-term production supervisor, Henry Henigson, to oversee the film. Henigson arrived in Italy in the spring of 1956.[38] Art directors William A. Horning and Edward Carfagno created the overall look of the film, relying on the more than five years of research which had already been completed for the production.[109] A skeleton crew of studio technicians arrived in the summer of 1956 to begin preparing the Cinecitt soundstages and back lot, and to oversee the construction of additional buildings which would be needed to house the production team.[108] The largest Cinecitt soundstage was not used for filming at all, but rather converted into a vast costume warehouse. Another soundstage housed a dry cleaning facility, a traditional laundry, a sculptors' workshop, and a shoe repair facility.[109] Pre-production began at Cinecitt around October 1957.[14] The MGM Art Department produced more than 15,000 sketches and drawings of costumes, sets, props, and other items needed for the film (8,000 alone for the costumes); photostatted each item; and cross-referenced and catalogued them for use by the production design team and fabricators.[110] More than a million props were ultimately manufactured.[111] MGM location scouts arrived in Rome ("yet again", according to the New York Times) to identify shooting locations in August 1957.[112] Location shooting in Africa was actively under consideration.[113] In mid-January 1958, MGM said that filming in North Africa (later revealed to be Libya) would begin on March 1, 1958, and that 200 camels and 2,500 horses had already been procured for the studio's use there.[114] The production was then scheduled to move to Rome on April 1, where Andrew Marton had been hired as second unit director and 72 horses were being trained for the chariot race sequence.[114] However, the Libyan government canceled the production's film permit for religious reasons on March 11, 1958, just a week before filming was to have begun.[115]The Ben-Hur production utilized 300 sets scattered over 148 acres (60ha) and nine sound stages.[116] It was filmed largely at Cinecitt Studios. Several sets still standing from Quo Vadis in 1951 were refurbished and used for Ben-Hur.[116] By the end of the production more than 1,000,000 pounds (450,000kg) of plaster and 40,000 cubic feet (1,100m3) of lumber were used.[85][117] The budget called for more than 100,000 costumes and 1,000 suits of armor to be made, for the hiring of 10,000 extras, and the procurement of hundreds of camels, donkeys, horses, and sheep.[15][47] Costume designer Elizabeth Haffenden oversaw a staff of 100 wardrobe fabricators who began manufacturing the wardrobe a year before the cameras rolled. Special silk was imported from Thailand, the armor manufactured in West Germany, and the woolens made and embroidered in the United Kingdom and various countries of South America. Many leather goods were hand-tooled in the United Kingdom as well, while Italian shoemakers manufactured the boots and shoes. The lace for costumes came from France, while costume jewelry was purchased in Switzerland.[118] More than 400 pounds (180kg) of hair were donated by women in the Piedmont region of Italy to make wigs and beards for the production,[119] and 1,000 feet (300m) of track laid down for the camera dollies.[85] A workshop employing 200 artists and workmen provided the hundreds of friezes and statues needed.[47] A cafeteria capable of serving more than 5,000 extras in 20 minutes was also built.[83] The mountain village of Arcinazzo Romano,[119] 40 miles (64km) from Rome, served as a stand-in for the town of Nazareth.[45] Beaches near Anzio were also used,[111] and caves just south of the city served as the leper colony.[105] Some additional desert panoramas were shot in Arizona, and some close-up inserts taken at the MGM studios, with the final images photographed on February 3, 1958.[51]The film was intended to be historically accurate. Hugh Gray, a noted historian and motion picture studio researcher, was hired by Zimbalist as the film's historical advisor. A veteran of the Hollywood historical epic, it was the last film he worked on.[90] Even the smallest details were historically correct. For example, Wyler asked a professor at the University of Jerusalem to copy a portion of the Dead Sea Scrolls for a scene that called for parchment with Hebrew writing on it.[119]The sea battle was filmed using miniatures in a huge tank on the back lot at the MGM studios in Culver City, California.[116] More than 40 miniature ships were built for the sequence.[111] Shot in November and December 1957,[60] it was one of the first sequences created for the film.[120] The script contained no description of or dialogue for the sea battle, and none had been written by the time the production schedule got around to filming the live-action sequences. According to editor John Dunning, screenwriter Christopher Fry looked at the miniature footage which Dunning had edited into a rough cut, and then wrote the interior and above-deck scenes.[121] Two 175-foot (53m) long Roman galleys, each of them seaworthy, were built for the live-action segment.[47] The ships were constructed based on plans found in Italian museums for actual ancient Roman galleys.[109] An artificial lake with equipment capable of generating sea-sized waves was built at the Cinecitt studios to accommodate the galleys.[85] A massive backdrop, 200 feet (61m) wide by 50 feet (15m) high, was painted and erected to hide the city and hills in the background.[85] Third unit director Richard Thorpe was hired on July 17, 1958, at the request of William Wyler to film the above-decks sequences,[67] but a directing commitment back in the United States required him to leave the production with filming still incomplete.[120] Dunning says he then directed most of the below-decks scenes, including the sequence in which Quintus Arrius' flagship is rammed.[120] To make the scene bloodier, Dunning says he sought out Italian extras who had missing limbs, then had the makeup crews rig them with fake bone and blood to make it appear as if they had lost a hand or leg during the battle.[120] When Dunning edited his own footage later, he made sure that these men were not on screen for long so that audiences would not be upset.[120] (There was so much footage of the sea battle left over that Charlton Heston used it in his 1972 film Antony and Cleopatra.)[122] The above-decks footage was integrated with the miniature work using process shots and traveling mattes.[123]Dunning says that he directed most of the critical scene in which Quintus Arrius first confronts Judah Ben-Hur on the galley, as well as the following segment in which Arrius forces the slaves to row at high speed.[120] Some of the dialogue in the scene, he says, was shot by Wyler, but most of the rest (including the high-speed rowing) was shot by Dunning himself.[120] Dunning has stated that he spent several days on the high-speed rowing segment, shooting the sequence over and over from different angles to ensure that there was plenty of coverage. He then edited the immense amount of footage down to obtain a rough cut that matched the script, and then re-edited the footage to be more cinematic and work emotionally on screen.[120] The galley sequence is one of the few scenes in the film which is not historically accurate, as the Roman navy (in contrast to its early modern counterparts) did not employ convicts as galley slaves.[124]One of the most sumptuous sets was the villa of Quintus Arrius, which included 45 working fountains and 8.9 miles (14.3km) of pipes.[109] Wealthy citizens of Rome, who wanted to portray their ancient selves, acted as extras in the villa scenes.[116] Among them were Baroness Lillian de Balzo (Hungary), Princess Carmen de Hohenlohe (Spain), Prince Cristian Hohenlohe (Spain), Countess Nona Medici (Italy), Count Marigliano del Monte (Italy), Count Santiago Oneto (Spain), Count Mario Rivoltella (Italy), Prince Emanuele Ruspoli (Italy), Prince Raimondo Ruspoli (Italy), and Princess Irina Wassilchikoff (Russia).[83] To recreate the ancient city streets of Jerusalem, a vast set covering 0.5-square-mile (1.3km2) was built,[10] which included a 75-foot (23m) high Joppa Gate.[116]The sets were so vast and visually exciting that they became a tourist attraction.[10] Tour buses visited the site hourly, and entertainers such as Harry Belafonte, Kirk Douglas, Susan Hayward, Audrey Hepburn, and Jack Palance traveled to Italy to see the production.[125] The huge sets could be seen from the outskirts of Rome, and MGM estimated that more than 5,000 people were given tours of the sets.[85] Another 25,000 tourists stopped by the studios to see the production in progress.[119] The New York Times reported that thousands more viewed the sets without entering the grounds.[85]Dismantling the sets cost $125,000.[85] Almost all the filmmaking equipment was turned over to the Italian government, which sold and exported it.[85] MGM turned title to the artificial lake over to Cinecitt.[85] MGM retained control over the costumes and the artificial lake background, which went back to the United States.[85] The chariots were also returned to the U.S., where they were used as promotional props.[85] The life-size galleys and pirate ships were dismantled to prevent them from being used by competing studios.[85] Some of the horses were adopted by the men who trained them, while others were sold.[85] Many of the camels, donkeys, and other exotic animals were sold to circuses and zoos in Europe.[85]All told, there were 1,100,000 feet (340,000m) of film shot.[51] According to editor John D. Dunning, the first cut of the film was four and one-half hours long[120] (although a mass media report in March 1959 indicated the running time was closer to five hours).[126] William Wyler said his goal was to bring the running time down to three and a half hours.[126] Editors Dunning and Winters saw their job as condensing the picture without losing any information or emotional impact.[120] Dunning later said that he felt some of the leper colony sequence could have been cut.[120] The most difficult editing decisions, he also said, came during scenes which involved Jesus Christ, as these contained almost no dialogue and most of the footage was purely reaction shots by actors.[127] Editing was also complicated by the 70mm footage being printed. Because no editing equipment (such as the Moviola) existed which could handle the 70mm print, the 70mm footage would be reduced to 35mm and then cut. This caused much of the image to be lost, and according to Dunning "you didn't even know what you had until you cut the negative. We'd print up the 70 now and then, and project it to see what we were getting against what we were seeing in the 35. We really did it blind."[128] When the film was edited into its final form, it ran 213 minutes and included just 19,000 feet (5,800m) of film.[51] It was the third-longest motion picture ever made at the time, behind Gone With The Wind and The Ten Commandments.[51]The editors had little do with inserting music into the film. Composer Mikls Rzsa viewed a near-final cut of the film, and then made scoring notes. Afterward, Rzsa consulted with the editors, who made suggestions, and then wrote his score and had music inserted where he wished.[129]The film score was composed and conducted by Mikls Rzsa, who scored most of MGM's epics. The composer was hired by executive producer Sam Zimbalist.[130] Rzsa conducted research into Greek and Roman music of the period to give his score an archaic sound while still being modern. Rzsa himself directed the 100-piece MGM Symphony Orchestra during the 12 recording sessions (which stretched over 72 hours). The soundtrack was recorded in six-channel stereo.[118] More than three hours of music were composed for the film,[131] and two-and-a-half hours of it were finally used, making it (as of 2001) the longest score ever composed for a motion picture.[132] Unlike previous efforts for films set in the distant past, Rzsa quoted no ancient Greek or Roman musical themes in his score.[132] But he did re-use music he had composed for Quo Vadis in his Ben-Hur score.[132] The score contains no leitmotifs for the main characters. While not a leitmotif, the score does transition from full orchestra to pipe organ whenever Jesus Christ appears.[118]Rzsa won his third Academy Award for his score. As of 2001, it was the only musical score in the ancient and medieval epic genre of film to win an Oscar.[132] Like most film musical soundtracks, it was issued as an album for the public to enjoy as a distinct piece of music. But the score was so lengthy, it had to be released in 1959 on three LP records, although a one-LP version with Carlo Savina conducting the Symphony Orchestra of Rome was also issued. In addition, to provide a more "listenable" album, Rzsa arranged his score into a "Ben-Hur Suite", which was released on Lion Records (an MGM subsidiary which issued low-priced records) in 1959.[131][133] This made the Ben-Hur film musical score the first to be released not only in its entirety but also as a separate album.[132]The Ben-Hur score is considered to be the best of Rzsa's career.[134] The musical soundtrack to Ben-Hur remained deeply influential into the mid 1970s, when film music composed by John Williams for films such as Jaws, Star Wars, and Raiders of the Lost Ark became more popular among composers and film-goers.[135]Rzsa's score has since seen several notable re-releases. In 1967, Rzsa himself arranged and recorded another four-movement suite of music from the film with the Nuremberg Symphony Orchestra. It was released by Capitol Records. In 1977, Decca Records recorded an album of highlights from the score featuring the United Kingdom's National Philharmonic Orchestra and Chorus. Sony Music reissued the first two of the three-LP 1959 recording (along with selections from the film's actual soundtrack) as a two-CD set in 1991.[136] Rhino Records issued a two-CD release in 1996 which featured remastered original recordings, outtakes from the original film soundtrack, alternate and recording outtakes, and extended versions of some musical sequences.[132][136] In 2012, Film Score Monthly and WaterTower Music issued a limited edition five-CD set of music from the film. It included a remastered film score (as heard on screen) on two discs; two discs of alternate versions, additional alternate versons, and unused tracks (presented in film order); and the contents of the three-LP MGM and one-LP Lion Records albums on a single disc.[136]Film critic Kevin Brownlow has called the chariot race sequence as creative and influential a piece of cinema as the famous Odessa Steps sequence in Sergei Eisenstein's The Battleship Potemkin, which introduced modern concepts of film editing and montage to cinema.[137]The chariot race in Ben-Hur was directed by Andrew Marton and Yakima Canutt,[138] filmmakers who often acted as second unit directors on other people's films. Each man had an assistant director, who shot additional footage.[139] Among these were Sergio Leone,[140] who was senior assistant director in the second unit and responsible for retakes.[141] William Wyler shot the "pageantry" sequence that occurs before the race, scenes of the jubilant crowd, and the victory scenes after the race concludes.[142] The "pageantry" sequence before the race begins is a shot-by-shot remake of the same sequence from the 1925 silent film version.[137] Wyler added the parade around the track because he knew that the chariot race would be primarily composed of close-up and medium shots. To impress the audience with the grandeur of the arena, Wyler added the parade in formation (even though it was not historically accurate).[66]The original screenwriter, Karl Tunberg, had written just three words ("the chariot race") to describe the now-famous sequence, and no other writer had enlarged on his description.[80] Marton and Canutt wrote 38 pages of script which outlined every aspect of the race, including action, stunts, and camera shots and angles.[80] According to editor John Dunning, producer Sam Zimbalist was deeply involved in the planning and shooting of the chariot sequence, and the construction of the arena.[139]The chariot arena was modeled on a historic circus in Jerusalem.[116] Covering 18 acres (7.3ha), it was the largest film set ever built at that time.[143] Constructed at a cost of $1 million, it took a thousand workmen more than a year to carve the oval out of a rock quarry.[109][116] The racetrack featured 1,500-foot (460m) long straightaways and five-story-high grandstands.[116] Over 250 miles (400km) of metal tubing were used to erect the grandstands.[85] Matte paintings created the illusion of upper stories of the grandstands and the background mountains.[144] The production crew researched ancient Roman racetracks, but were unable to determine what a historic track surface was like. The crew decided to create their own racecourse surface, one that would be hard enough to support the steel-rimmed chariot wheels but soft enough to not harm the horses after hundreds of laps. The construction crew laid down a bed of crushed rock topped by a layer of ground lava and finely ground yellow rock.[80] More than 40,000 short tons (36,000t) of sand were brought in from beaches on the Mediterranean to cover the track.[145] Other elements of the circus were also historically accurate. Imperial Roman racecourses featured a raised 10 feet (3.0m) high spina (the center section), metae (columnar goalposts at each end of the spina), dolphin-shaped lap counters, and carceres (the columned building in the rear which housed the cells where horses waited prior to the race).[144][146] The four statues atop the spina were 30 feet (9.1m) high.[47] A chariot track identical in size was constructed next to the set and used to train the horses and lay out camera shots.[146]Planning for the chariot race took nearly a year to complete.[116] Seventy-eight horses were bought and imported from Yugoslavia and Sicily in November 1957, exercised into peak physical condition, and trained by Hollywood animal handler Glenn Randall to pull the quadriga (a Roman Empire chariot drawn by four horses abreast).[111][116] Andalusian horses played Ben-Hur's Arabians, while the others in the chariot race were primarily Lipizzans.[147] A veterinarian, a harness maker, and 20 stable boys were employed to care for the horses and ensure they were outfitted for racing each day.[111] When a blacksmith for making horseshoes could not be found, an 18-year-old Italian boy was trained in the art of blacksmithing in order to do so.[119] The firm of Danesi Brothers[148] built 18 chariots,[149] each weighing 900 pounds (410kg).[15] Nine were practice chariots.[148] Principal cast members, stand-ins, and stunt people made 100 practice laps of the arena in preparation for shooting.[106] Because the chariot race was considered so dangerous, a 20-bed infirmary staffed by two doctors and two nurses was built next to the set to care for anyone injured during shooting.[119][150]Heston and Boyd both had to learn how to drive a chariot. Heston, an experienced horseman, took daily three-hour lessons in chariot driving after he arrived in Rome and picked up the skill quickly.[45][151] (He also learned swordfighting, how to throw a javelin, camel riding, and rowing.)[152] Heston was outfitted with special contact lenses to prevent the grit kicked up during the race from injuring his eyes.[151] Boyd, however, needed four weeks of training to feel comfortable (but not expert) at driving the quadriga.[45] For the other charioteers, six actors with extensive experience with horses were flown in from Hollywood. Local actors also portrayed charioteers. Among them were Giuseppe Tosi, who had once been a bodyguard for Victor Emmanuel III of Italy.[83]The production schedule originally called for the chariot race to be shot in the spring, when weather was cooler for the horses and when Wyler would not be placing heavy demands on Heston and Boyd's time. But the arena surface was not ready, the arena set was not finished, and the horses had not finished their training.[45] Shooting of the chariot sequence began on the same day as principal photography. But again filming was delayed. The racecourse surface proved so soft that it slowed the horses down and a day of shooting was lost as the yellow rock and all but 3.5 inches (8.9cm) of crushed lava were removed.[153]Marton and Canutt filmed the entire chariot sequence with stunt doubles in long shot, edited the footage together, and showed the footage to Zimbalist, Wyler, and Heston to show them what the race should look like and to indicate where close-up shots with Heston and Boyd should go.[80] Seven thousand extras were hired to cheer in the stands.[10][143][154] Economic conditions in Italy were poor at the time, and as shooting for the chariot scene wound down only 1,500 extras were needed on any given day. On June 6, more than 3,000 people seeking work were turned away. The crowd rioted, throwing stones and assaulting the set's gates until police arrived and dispersed them.[155] Dynamite charges were used to show the chariot wheels and axles splintering from the effects of Messala's barbed-wheel attacks.[144] Three lifelike dummies were placed at key points in the race to give the appearance of men being run over by chariots.[150]The cameras used during the chariot race also presented problems. The 70mm lenses had a minimum focal length of 50 feet (15m), and the camera was mounted on a small Italian-made car so the camera crew could keep in front of the chariots. But the horses accelerated down the 1,500-foot (460m) straightaway much faster than the car could, and the long focal length left Martin and Canutt with too little time to get their shots. The production company purchased a more powerful American car, but the horses still proved too fast. Even with a head start, the larger American car could give the filmmakers only a few more seconds of shot time. Since the horses had to be running at top speed for the best visual impact, Marton chose to film the chariot race with a smaller lens with a much shorter minimum focal length. He also decided that the car should stay only a few feet ahead of the horses.[87] This was highly dangerous, for if the car did not make its turns or slowed down, a deadly crash with the horses could occur. The changes, however, solved the problems the camera crew was encountering. As filming progressed, vast amounts of footage were shot for this sequence. The ratio of footage shot to footage used was 263:1, one of the highest ratios ever for a film.[150]John Dunning and Ralph E. Winters edited the footage of the chariot sequence. According to Dunning, Winters edited most of the chariot race but the two men discussed it at length with some input from Wyler.[156] The two editors decided that, once the race was under way, one of the charioteers should be killed immediately to demonstrate to the audience that the race was a deadly one. Inserts of the barbs on the hub of Messala's chariot were inserted repeatedly throughout the sequence to make it obvious that his chariot was highly dangerous. As footage was shot, it was roughly edited by Ralph Winters. If the footage was poor, the stunts didn't come off on camera well, or coverage was lacking, then more footage would be shot. At the end of three months, Dunning says, Winters had so much footage on hand that he asked Dunning to come to Rome to help him edit together the final sequence.[139]One of the most notable moments in the race came from a near-fatal accident. Joe Canutt, Yakima Canutt's son, did Heston's more dangerous stunts during the sequence.[116] When Judah Ben-Hur's chariot jumps over the wreckage of a chariot in its path, Ben-Hur is almost thrown out of his chariot. He hangs on and climbs back aboard to continue the race. While the jump was planned (the horses were trained to leap over the wreckage, and a telephone pole had been half-buried in the earth to force the chariot to jump into the air),[157] stunt man Joe Canutt was tossed into the air by accident; he incurred a minor chin injury.[158] Marton wanted to keep the shot, but Zimbalist felt the footage was unusable. Marton conceived the idea of showing that Ben-Hur was able to land on and cling to the front of his chariot, then scramble back into the quadriga while the horses kept going.[157] The long shot of Canutt's accident was cut together with a close-up of Heston climbing back aboard constitutes one of the race's most memorable moments.[159] Boyd did all but two of his own stunts.[12] For the sequence where Messala is dragged beneath a chariot's horses and trampled to death, Boyd wore steel armor under his costume and acted out the close-up shot and the shot of him on his back, attempting to climb up into the horses' harness to escape injury. A dummy was used to obtain the trampling shot in this sequence.[158]In all, the chariot scene took five weeks (spread over three months) to film at a total cost of $1 million[80] and required more than 200 miles (320km) of racing to complete.[143] Two of the $100,000 70mm lenses were destroyed during the filming of the close-up shots.[78] Once the "pageantry" and victory parade sequences of the race were finished, Wyler did not visit the chariot race set again. Marton asked the editors to put together a rough cut of the film, with temporary sound effects, and then asked Zimbalist to screen it for Wyler to get Wyler's approval for the sequence. Zimbalist said no. Wyler was tired, and might not fully appreciate the rough cut and demand that the whole race be refilmed. But Zimbalist changed his mind and showed the rough cut to Wyler several days later. According to Zimbalist, Wyler said "it's one of the greatest cinematic achievements" he'd ever seen.[157] Wyler did not see the final cut of the chariot race until the press screening of Ben-Hur.[157]Several urban legends exist regarding the chariot sequence. One claims that a stuntman died during filming. Stuntman Nosher Powell claims in his autobiography, "We had a stunt man killed in the third week, and it happened right in front of me. You saw it, too, because the cameras kept turning and it's in the movie."[160] But movie historian Monica Silveira Cyrino discounted this claim in 2005, and said there were no published accounts of any serious injuries or deaths during filming of the chariot race.[116] Indeed, the only recorded death to occur during the filming was that of producer Sam Zimbalist, who died of a heart attack at the age of 57 on November 4, 1958, while on the set.[161] MGM executives asked Wyler to take over the executive producer's job, with an extra salary of $100,000. Wyler agreed, although he had assistance from experienced MGM executives as well.[162] Production supervisor Henry Henigson was so overcome by stress-related heart problems during the shoot that doctors feared for his life and ordered him off the set.[10] But Henigson returned to the production shortly thereafter, and did not die. Nor were any horses injured during the shoot; in fact, the number of hours the horses could be used each day was actually shortened to keep them out of the summer heat.[163]Another urban legend states that a red Ferrari can be seen during the chariot race. The book Movie Mistakes claims this is a myth.[164] Heston, in a DVD commentary track for the film, mentions that a third urban legend says he wore a wristwatch during the chariot race. Heston points out that he wore leather bracers up to the elbow.[165]A massive $3 million marketing effort helped promote Ben-Hur.[130] MGM established a special "Ben-Hur Research Department" which surveyed more than 2,000 high schools in 47 American cities to gauge teenage interest in the film.[166] A high school study guide was also created and distributed.[166] Sindlinger and Company was hired to conduct a nationwide survey to gauge the impact of the marketing campaign.[167] In 1959 and 1960, more than $20 million in candy; children's tricycles in the shape of chariots; gowns; hair barrettes; items of jewelry; men's ties; bottles of perfume; "Ben-Her" and "Ben-His" towels; toy armor, helmets, and swords; umbrellas; and hardback and paperback versions of the novel (tied to the film with cover art) were sold.[106][130]Ben-Hur premiered at Loew's State Theatre in New York City on November 18, 1959. Present at the premiere were William Wyler, Charlton Heston, Stephen Boyd, Haya Harareet, Martha Scott, Ramon Novarro (who played Judah Ben-Hur in the 1925 silent film version), Spyros Skouras (president of the 20th Century Fox), Barney Balaban (president of Paramount Pictures), Jack Warner (president of Warner Bros.), Leonard Goldenson (president of the American Broadcasting Company), Moss Hart (playwright), Robert Kintner (an ABC Television executive), Sidney Kingsley (playwright), and Adolph Zukor (founder of Paramount Pictures).[168] Ben-Hur had box office receipts of $74.7 million domestically and $72.2 million internationally during its initial release.[169] It was the fastest-grossing film[10] as well as the highest grossing film of 1959,[170] in the process becoming the second-highest grossing film of all-time behind Gone with the Wind.[171] It saved MGM from financial disaster,[172] making a profit of $19.5 million on its initial release, and another $10.1 million in profits when re-released in 1969.[10] It ranked ninth on the list of all-time money-making films until 1975.[106]Ben-Hur received overwhelmingly positive reviews upon its release.[173] The film received a 89% approval rating from critics on aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, with its summary stating: "Uneven, but in terms of epic scope and grand spectacle, Ben-Hur still ranks among Hollywood's finest examples of pure entertainment."[174] Bosley Crowther, writing for the New York Times, called Ben-Hur "a remarkably intelligent and engrossing human drama".[175] While praising the acting and William Wyler's "close-to" direction, he also had high praise for the chariot race: "There has seldom been anything in movies to compare with this picture's chariot race. It is a stunning complex of mighty setting, thrilling action by horses and men, panoramic observation and overwhelming use of dramatic sound."[175] Jack Gaver, writing for United Press International, also had praise for the acting, calling it full of "genuine warmth and fervor and finely acted intimate scenes".[176] Philip K. Scheuer of the Los Angeles Times called it "magnificent, inspiring, awesome, enthralling, and all the other adjectives you have been reading about it."[177] He also called the editing "generally expert" although at times abrupt.[177] Ronald Holloway, writing for Variety, called Ben-Hur "a majestic achievement, representing a superb blending of the motion picture arts by master craftsmen," and concluded that "Gone With the Wind, Metro's own champion all-time top grosser, will eventually have to take a back seat."[178] The chariot race "will probably be preserved in film archives as the finest example of the use of the motion picture camera to record an action sequence. The race, directed by Andrew Marton and Yakima Canutt, represents some 40 minutes of the most hair-raising excitement that film audiences have ever witnessed."[178]There was some criticism, however. Crowther felt the film was too long.[175] Scheuer, whilst mostly praising the film, felt the its biggest fault was "overstatement", and that it hammered home at points long after they had been made. He singled out the galley rowing sequence, Jesus' journey to the place of crucifixion, nearly all the sequences involving the lepers. He also lightly criticized Charlton Heston for being more physically than emotionally compelling.[177] John McCarten of The New Yorker was more critical of Heston, writing that he "speaks English as if he'd learned it from records."[179] Even William Wyler later privately admitted he was disappointed with Heston's acting.[12] Film critic Dwight Macdonald also was largely negative.[173] He found the film so uninvolving and lengthy that he said, "I felt like a motorist trapped at a railroad crossing while a long freight train slowly trundles by."[180] British film critic John Pym, writing for Time Out, was equally dismissive, calling the film a "four-hour Sunday school lesson".[181] Many French and American film critics who believed in the auteur theory of filmmaking saw the film as confirmation of their belief that William Wyler was "merely a commercial craftsman" rather than a serious artist.[24]Ben-Hur was nominated for 12 Academy Awards and won an unprecedented 11. As of 2011[update], only Titanic in 1998 and The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King in 2004 have matched the film's wins.[182][183] The lone category where Ben-Hur did not win was for Best Adapted Screenplay, and most observers attributed this to the controversy over the writing credit.[12][49]Ben-Hur won the following Oscars:MGM and Panavision shared a special technical Oscar in March 1960 for developing the Camera 65 photographic process.[184]Ben-Hur also won three Golden Globe Awards  Best Motion Picture, Drama, Best Motion Picture Director, Best Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture for Stephen Boyd  and received a Special Achievement Award (which went to Andrew Marton for directing the chariot race sequence).[185] Heston was nominated for a Golden Globe in the Best Performance by an Actor in a Motion Picture - Drama category, but did not win. The picture also won the BAFTA Award for Best Film,[186] the New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Film,[187] and the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in a Motion Picture.[188]Ben-Hur also appears on several "best of" lists generated by the American Film Institute, an independent non-profit organization created by the National Endowment for the Arts in 1967. The "AFI 100 Years... series" were created by juries consisting of over 1,500 artists, scholars, critics, and historians, with movies selected based on the film's popularity over time, historical significance, and cultural impact. Ben-Hur appeared on the following lists:In 2004, the National Film Preservation Board selected Ben-Hur for preservation by the National Film Registry for being a "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" motion picture.[189]The film's first telecast took place on Sunday, February 14, 1971.[190] In what was then a television first for a Hollywood film, it was broadcast over five hours (including commercials) during a single evening by CBS,[191] preempting all of that network's regular programming for that one evening. It was watched by 85.82 million people for a 37.1 average rating.[192] It was one of the highest rated movies ever screened on television at the time (behind the broadcast premiere of Bridge on the River Kwai),[193] though The Wizard of Oz was still drawing huge TV ratings on its annual telecasts at the time. Ben-Hur was repeated on CBS at least once more before being sold to local television stations. Years later, the film went to cable, and now turns up fairly regularly on Turner Classic Movies.Ben-Hur has been released on home video on several occasions. Recent releases have all been on DVD and Blu-ray Disc. A two-sided single disc widescreen release occurred in the United States on March 13, 2001.[165] This release included several featurettes, including a commentary by Charlton Heston, a making-of documentary (made for a laserdisc release in 1993), screen tests, and a photo gallery.[165] This edition was released soon thereafter as a two-disc set in other countries. The film saw another DVD release on September 13, 2005.[194] This four-disc edition included remastered images and audio, an additional commentary, two additional featurettes, and a complete version of the 1925 silent version of Ben-Hur.[194] A boxed "Deluxe Edition", issued in the U.S. in 2002, included postcard-sized reprints of lobby cards, postcard-sized black-and-white stills with machine-reproduced autographs of cast members, a matte-framed color image from the film with a 35mm film frame mounted below it, and a 27-by-40-inch (69 by 100 cm) reproduction movie poster.[195]In 2011, Warner Home Video released a 50th anniversary edition on Blu-ray Disc and DVD, making it the first home video release where the movie is present on its original aspect ratio.[196] For this release, the film was completely restored frame by frame from an 8K scan of the original 65mm negative. The restoration costed $1 million, and was one of the highest resolution restorations ever made by Warner Bros. A new musical soundtrack-only option and six new featurettes (one of which was an hour long) were also included.November 18, 1959(1959-11-18)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Writing

3.2.1 Dispute over the screenplay credits


3.3 Casting
3.4 Cinematography
3.5 Principal photography
3.6 Production design
3.7 Editing
3.8 Musical score

3.1 Development3.2 Writing

3.2.1 Dispute over the screenplay credits

3.2.1 Dispute over the screenplay credits3.3 Casting3.4 Cinematography3.5 Principal photography3.6 Production design3.7 Editing3.8 Musical score4 Chariot race sequence

4.1 Set design
4.2 Preparation
4.3 Filming
4.4 Myths

4.1 Set design4.2 Preparation4.3 Filming4.4 Myths5 Release

5.1 Critical reception
5.2 Accolades
5.3 Broadcast and home video releases

5.1 Critical reception5.2 Accolades5.3 Broadcast and home video releases6 References7 Bibliography8 External links3.1 Development3.2 Writing

3.2.1 Dispute over the screenplay credits

3.2.1 Dispute over the screenplay credits3.3 Casting3.4 Cinematography3.5 Principal photography3.6 Production design3.7 Editing3.8 Musical score3.2.1 Dispute over the screenplay credits4.1 Set design4.2 Preparation4.3 Filming4.4 Myths5.1 Critical reception5.2 Accolades5.3 Broadcast and home video releasesCharlton Heston as Judah Ben-HurJack Hawkins as Quintus ArriusHaya Harareet as EstherStephen Boyd as MessalaHugh Griffith as Sheik IlderimMartha Scott as MiriamCathy O'Donnell as TirzahSam Jaffe as SimonidesFinlay Currie as Balthasar and the narratorFrank Thring as Pontius PilateTerence Longdon as DrususGeorge Relph as Tiberius CaesarAndr Morell as SextusBest PictureBest Director for William WylerBest Actor in a Leading Role for Charlton HestonBest Actor in a Supporting Role for Hugh GriffithBest Art Direction, Color for Edward C. Carfagno, William A. Horning, and Hugh HuntBest Cinematography, ColorBest Costume Design, ColorBest Special EffectsBest Film Editing for John D. Dunning and Ralph E. WintersBest Scoring of a Dramatic or Comedy PictureBest Sound for Franklin MiltonAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  #72AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills  #49AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  #21AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers  #56AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #100AFI's 10 Top 10  #2 Epic filmAlexander, Shana. "Will the Real Burt Please Stand Up?" Life. September 6, 1963.The Alfred I. Du Pont-Columbia University Survey of Broadcast Journalism. New York: Gosset & Dunlap, 1971.Altman, Rick. Sound Theory, Sound Practice. Florence, Ky.: Psychology Press, 1992."An Actor to Watch." Coronet. January 1, 1959.Belton, John. American Cinema/American Culture. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008."Ben-Hur Rides a Chariot Again." Life. January 19, 1959.Block, Alex Ben and Wilson, Lucy Autrey. George Lucas's Blockbusting: A Decade-by-Decade Survey of Timeless Movies, Including Untold Secrets of Their Financial and Cultural Success. New York: HarperCollins, 2010.Bret, David. Rock Hudson. London: Robson, 2004.Brosnan, John. Movie Magic: The Story of Special Effects in the Cinema. London: Abacus, 1977.Brownlow, Kevin. The Parade's Gone By... Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1968.Buford, Kate. Burt Lancaster: An American Life. New York: Knopf, 2000.Canutt, Yakima and Drake, Oliver. Stunt Man: The Autobiography of Yakima Canutt. Reprint ed. Norman, Okla.: University of Oklahoma Press, 1997Casson, Lionel. Ships and Seamanship in the Ancient World. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1971.Clark, Al. The Film Year Book 1984. New York: Grove Press, 1983.Cole, Clayton. "Fry, Wyler, and the Row Over Ben-Hur in Hollywood." Films and Filming. March 1959.Coughlan, Robert. "Lew Wallace Got Ben-Hur Goingand He's Never Stopped." Life. November 16, 1959.Cowley, Robert. "Introduction." In What Ifs? Of American History: Eminent Historians Imagine What Might Have Been. New York: Penguin, 2004.Cyrino, Monica Silveira. Big Screen Rome. Malden, Mass.: Blackwell, 2005.Didinger, Ray and Macnow, Glen. The Ultimate Book of Sports Movies: Featuring the 100 Greatest Sports Films of All Time. Philadelphia, Pa.: Running Press, 2009.Doherty, Thomas Patrick. Teenagers and Teenpics: The Juvenilization of American Movies in the 1950s. Philadelphia, Pa.: Temple University Press, 2002.Dowdy, Andrew. The Films of the Fifties: The American State of Mind. New York: Morrow, 1973.Dunning, John D. "'Good Stuff' Never Changes: John D. Dunning." In First Cut: Conversations With Film Editors. Gabriella Oldham, ed. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1995.Eagan, Daniel. America's Film Legacy: The Authoritative Guide to the Landmark Movies in the National Film Registry. New York: Continuum, 2010.Eldridge, David. Hollywood's History Films. London: Tauris, 2006.Eyman, Scott. The Speed of Sound: Hollywood and the Talkie Revolution, 1926-1930. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1997.Feeney, F.X. "Ben-Gore: Romancing the Word With Gore Vidal." Written By. December 1997-January 1998.Frayling, Christopher. Spaghetti Westerns: Cowboys and Europeans From Karl May to Sergio Leone. London: I.B. Tauris & Co., 2006.Gates, Phyllis and Thomas, Bob. My Husband, Rock Hudson: The Real Story of Rock Hudson's Marriage to Phyllis Gates. New York: Jove Books, 1987.Giddins, Gary. Warning Shadows: Home Alone With Classic Cinema. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2010.Haines, Richard W. Technicolor Movies: The History of Dye Transfer Printing. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 1993.Hall, Sheldon and Neale, Stephen. Epics, Spectacles, and Blockbusters: A Hollywood History. Detroit, Mich.: Wayne State University Press, 2010.Heater, Claude. Fatal Flaws of the Most Correct Book on Earth. Maitland, Fla.: Xulon Press, 2008.Herman, Jan. A Talent for Trouble: The Life of Hollywood's Most Acclaimed Director, William Wyler. New York: Da Capo Press, 1997.Heston, Charlton. In the Arena. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995.Hezser, Catherine. "Ben Hur and Ancient Jewish Slavery." In A Wandering Galilean: Essays in Honour of Sean Freyne. Boston: Brill Academic Publishers, 2008.Hickman, Roger. Mikls Rzsa's Ben-Hur: A Film Score Guide. Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press, 2011.Hofler, Robert. The Man Who Invented Rock Hudson: The Pretty Boys and Dirty Deals of Henry Willson. New York: Carroll & Graf, 2005.Joshel, Sandra R.; Malamud, Margaret; and McGuire, Donald T. Imperial Projections: Ancient Rome in Modern Popular Culture. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005.Kaplan, Fred. Gore Vidal: A Biography. New York: Doubleday, 1999.Kinn, Gail and Piazza, Jim. The Academy Awards: The Complete Unofficial History. Rev. and updated ed. New York: Black Dog & Leventhal Publishers, 2005.Kramer, Peter. The New Hollywood: From 'Bonnie and Clyde' to 'Star Wars'. London: Wallflower, 2005.Lennox, Doug. Now You Know the Bible. Toronto: Dundurn Press, 2010.MacDonald, Laurence E. The Invisible Art of Film Music: A Comprehensive History. New York: Ardsley House, 1998.Madsen, Axel. William Wyler: The Authorized Biography. New York: Crowell, 1973.Magill, Frank N. Magill's Survey of Cinema. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Salem Press, 1980.Malone, Aubrey. Sacred Profanity: Spirituality at the Movies. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Praeger, 2010.McAlister, Melani. Epic Encounters: Culture, Media, and U.S. Interests in the Middle East Since 1945. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 2005.Monush, Barry. Screen World Presents the Encyclopedia of Hollywood Film Actors. New York: Applause Theatre and Cinema Books, 2003.Morsberger, Robert Eustis and Morsberger, Katharine M. Lew Wallace, Militant Romantic. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980.Mustazza, Leonard. The Literary Filmography, A-L. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 2006."On the Sound Track." Billboard. July 20, 1959.Parish, James Robert; Mank, Gregory W.; and Picchiarini, Richard. The Best of MGM: The Golden Years (1928-59). Westport, Conn.: Arlington House, 1981.Pomerance, Murray. "Introduction." In American Cinema of the 1950s: Themes and Variations. New Brunswick, N.J: Berg, 2005.Powell, Nosher. Nosher. London: Blake Publishing, 2001.Pratt, Douglas. Doug Pratt's DVD: Movies, Television, Music, Art, Adult, and More!, Volume 1. New York: UNET 2 Corporation, 2004.Pym, John. Time Out Film Guide. London: Penguin, 2002.Raymond, Emilie. From My Cold, Dead Hands: Charlton Heston and American Politics. Lexington, Ky.: University Press of Kentucky, 2006.Rode, Alan K. Charles McGraw: Biography of a Film Noir Tough Guy. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 2007.Rothwell, Kenneth S. A History of Shakespeare on Screen: A Century of Film and Television. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004.Sandys, John. Movie Mistakes Take 4. London: Virgin, 2006.Segrave, Kerry. Movies at Home: How Hollywood Came to Television. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 1999.Sennett, Ted. Great Movie Directors. New York: Abrams, 1986.Solomon, Jon. The Ancient World in the Cinema. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2001.Steinberg, Cobbett. Film Facts. New York: Facts on File, 1980.Stempel, Tom. American Audiences on Movies and Moviegoing. Lexington, Ky.: University Press of Kentucky, 2001.The Story of the Making of 'Ben-Hur: A Tale of the Christ'. New York: Random House, 1959.Sultanik, Aaron. Film, a Modern Art. New York: Cornwall Books, 1986.Thomas, Gordon. "Getting It Right the Second Time: Adapting Ben-Hur for the Screen." Bright Lights Film Journal. May 2006.Vidal, Gore. "How I Survived the Fifties." The New Yorker. October 2, 1995.Winkler, Martin M. Classical Myth & Culture in the Cinema. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.Wreszin, Michael and Macdonald, Dwight. Interviews With Dwight Macdonald. Jackson, Miss.: University Press of Mississippi, 2003.Wyler, William. "William Wyler." In Conversations with the Great Moviemakers of Hollywood's Golden Age at the American Film Institute. George Stevens, Jr., ed. New York: Random House, 2007.Ben-Hur Official WebsiteBen-Hur at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Shawshank Redemption is a 1994 American drama film written and directed by Frank Darabont and starring Tim Robbins and Morgan Freeman.Adapted from the Stephen King novella Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption, the film tells the story of Andy Dufresne, a banker who spends nearly two decades in Shawshank State Prison for the murder of his wife and her lover despite his claims of innocence. During his time at the prison, he befriends a fellow inmate, Ellis Boyd "Red" Redding, and finds himself protected by the guards after the warden begins using him in his money laundering operation.Despite a lukewarm box office reception that barely recouped its budget, the film received favorable reviews from critics, multiple award nominations, and has since enjoyed a remarkable life on cable television, VHS, DVD, and Blu-ray. It was included in the American Film Institute's 100 Years...100 Movies 10th Anniversary Edition.[2]In 1947, banker Andy Dufresne (Tim Robbins) is convicted of murdering his wife and her lover, based on circumstantial evidence, and is sentenced to two consecutive life sentences at Shawshank State Penitentiary. Andy quickly befriends contraband smuggler Ellis "Red" Redding (Morgan Freeman), an inmate serving a life sentence. Red procures a rock hammer for Andy, allowing him to create small stone chess pieces. Red later gets him a large poster of Rita Hayworth, followed in later years by images of Marilyn Monroe and Raquel Welch. Andy works in the prison laundry, but is regularly assaulted by the "bull queer" gang "the Sisters" and their leader Bogs (Mark Rolston).In 1949, Andy overhears the brutal chief guard Byron Hadley (Clancy Brown) complaining about taxes on a forthcoming inheritance, and informs him about a financial loophole. After another vicious assault by the Sisters nearly kills Andy, Bogs is beaten and crippled by Hadley. Bogs is sent to another prison and Andy is not attacked again. Warden Samuel Norton (Bob Gunton) meets with Andy and reassigns him to the prison library, to assist elderly inmate Brooks Hatlen (James Whitmore); a pretext for Andy to manage financial duties for the prison. His advice and expertise are soon sought by other guards at Shawshank and from nearby prisons. Andy begins writing weekly letters to the state government for funds to improve the decrepit library.In 1954, Brooks is freed on parole, but unable to adjust to the outside world after 50 years in prison, he hangs himself. Andy receives a library donation that includes a recording of The Marriage of Figaro. He plays an excerpt over the public address system, resulting in his receiving solitary confinement. After his release, Andy explains that he holds onto hope as something that the prison cannot take from him, but Red dismisses the idea. In 1963, Norton begins exploiting prison labor for public works, profiting by undercutting skilled labor costs and receiving kickbacks. He has Andy launder the money using the alias "Randall Stephens".In 1965, Tommy Williams (Gil Bellows) is incarcerated for robbery. He joins Andy and Red's circle of friends, and Andy helps him to pass his General Educational Development examinations. In 1966, after hearing the details of Andy's case, Tommy reveals that an inmate at another prison claimed responsibility for an identical murder, suggesting Andy's innocence. Andy approaches Norton with this information, but the warden refuses to listen. Norton places Andy in solitary confinement and has Tommy murdered by Hadley under the guise of an escape attempt. Andy refuses to continue with the scam, but Norton threatens to destroy the library and take away his protection and preferential treatment. After Andy is released from solitary confinement, he tells Red of his dream of living in Zihuatanejo, a Mexican Pacific coastal town. While Red shrugs it off as being unrealistic, Andy instructs him, should he ever be freed, to visit a specific hayfield near Buxton to retrieve a package.The next day at roll call, on finding Andy's cell empty, an irate Norton throws one of Andy's rocks at the poster of Raquel Welch hanging on the wall. The rock tears through the poster, revealing a tunnel that Andy had dug with his rock hammer over the previous two decades. The previous night, Andy escaped through the tunnel and the prison's sewage pipe with Norton's ledger, containing details of the money laundering. While guards search for him the following morning, Andy, posing as Randall Stephens, visits several banks to withdraw the laundered money. Finally, he sends the ledger and evidence of the corruption and murders at Shawshank to a local newspaper. The police arrive at Shawshank and take Hadley into custody, while Norton commits suicide to avoid arrest.After serving 40 years, Red receives parole. He struggles to adapt to life outside prison and fears he never will. Remembering his promise to Andy, he visits Buxton and finds a cache containing money and a letter, asking him to come to Zihuatanejo. Red violates his parole and travels to Fort Hancock, Texas to cross the border to Mexico, admitting he finally feels hope. On a beach in Zihuatanejo, he finds Andy, and the two friends are happily reunited.The cast also includes: Mark Rolston as Bogs Diamond, the leader of "The Sisters" prison gang and a prison rapist; Bill Boldender as Elmo Blatch, a criminal; Brian Libby as Floyd, David Proval as Snooze, and Joseph Ragno as Ernie, Andy and Red's friends; Frank Medrano as Fat Ass, a new inmate killed by Hadley; and Jeffrey DeMunn as the prosecuting attorney in Andy's trial.Chicago Sun-Times film reviewer Roger Ebert suggests that The Shawshank Redemption is an allegory for maintaining one's feeling of self-worth when placed in a hopeless position. The integrity of Andy Dufresne is an important theme in the story line, especially in prison, where integrity is lacking.[6]Angus C. Larcombe suggests that the film provides a great illustration of how characters can be free, even in prison, or unfree, even in freedom, based on one's outlook on life.[7]Darabont secured the film adaptation rights from author Stephen King after impressing the author with his short film adaptation of The Woman in the Room in 1983. Although the two had become friends and maintained a pen-pal relationship, Darabont did not work with him until four years later in 1987, when he optioned to adapt Shawshank. This is one of the more famous Dollar Deals made by King with aspiring filmmakers. Darabont later directed The Green Mile (1999), which was based on another work about a prison by Stephen King, and then followed that up with an adaptation of King's novella The Mist.Rob Reiner, who had previously adapted another King novella, The Body, into the movie Stand by Me (1986), offered $2.5million in an attempt to write and direct Shawshank. He planned to cast Tom Cruise in the part of Andy and Harrison Ford as Red. Darabont seriously considered and liked Reiner's vision, but he ultimately decided it was his "chance to do something really great" by directing the film himself.[3]Though the story is set in Maine, the Ohio State Reformatory in Mansfield, Ohio was used as a stand-in for the fictional Shawshank Prison. Though a large portion of the prison was torn down after filming, the main administration building and two cell blocks remained; the site would be revisited later for filming parts of the film Air Force One.[8] Several of the interior shots of the specialized prison facilities, such as the admittance rooms and the warden's office, were shot in the reformatory.[8] The interior of the boarding room used by Brooks and Red was located in the administration building, though exterior shots were made elsewhere.[8] The prison site remains a tourist attraction as of 2011.[8] Internal scenes in the prison cellblocks were actually filmed on a soundstage built inside the nearby shuttered Westinghouse factory.[8] Downtown scenes were also filmed in Mansfield, as well as neighboring Ashland, Ohio. The oak tree under which Andy buries his letter to Red is located at 403914N 822331W / 40.65400N 82.39195W / 40.65400; -82.39195 (Shawshank tree), near Malabar Farm State Park, in Lucas, Ohio. The tree was heavily damaged by straight-line winds in a thunderstorm on July 29, 2011; officials are unsure if the tree will survive.[9]The Shawshank Redemption received a limited release on September 23, 1994 in North America. During its opening weekend, the film earned $727,000 from 33 theatersan average of $22,040 per theater. It received a wide release on October 14, 1994, expanding to a total of 944 theaters to earn $2.4 millionan average of $2,545 per theaterfinishing as the number 9 film of the weekend.[1] The film left theaters in late November 1994, after 10 weeks with an approximate total gross of $16 million.[10]It was later re-released in February 1995, during the Oscar season, and made an additional $9 million.[10][not in citation given] In total the film made approximately $28.3 million in North American theaters, making it the number 51 highest grossing film of 1994 and the number 21 highest grossing R-rated film of 1994.[1]Entertainment Weekly reviewer Owen Gleiberman praised the choice of scenery, writing that the "moss-dark, saturated images have a redolent sensuality" that makes the film very realistic.[11] While praising Morgan Freeman's acting and oratory skills as making Red appear real, Gleiberman felt that with the "laconic-good-guy, neo-Gary Cooper role, Tim Robbins is unable to make Andy connect with the audience."[11]The film garnered a 90% approval rating from 61 criticsan average rating of 8.1 out of 10on the review-aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes.[12] Metacritic provides a score of 80 out of 100 from 19 critics, which indicates "generally favorable" reviews.[13]The movie was nominated for seven Academy Awards in 1994: Best Picture, Best Actor for Freeman, Best Adapted Screenplay for Frank Darabont, Best Cinematography for Roger Deakins, Best Editing for Richard Francis-Bruce, Best Original Score for Thomas Newman, and Best Sound Mixing for Robert J. Litt, Elliot Tyson, Michael Herbick and Willie D. Burton.[14] It received two Golden Globe Award nominations for Best Performance by an Actor in a Motion Picture for Freeman, and Best Screenplay for Darabont.[15] Robbins and Freeman were both nominated for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a leading role at the inaugural Screen Actors Guild Awards in 1995.[16] Darabont was nominated for a Directors Guild of America award in 1994 for Best Director for a feature film,[17] while cinematographer Roger Deakins won the American Society of Cinematographers award for Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography.[18]Despite its disappointing box office return, Warner Bros. shipped 320,000 rental video copies throughout the United States, and it became one of the top rented films of 1995. The film's home viewing success was considered to be based on positive recommendations and repeat custom.[4] The film's Academy Award nominations enabled it to fare well in the video sales and cable TV viewings.[citation needed] In June 1997, TNT, an American cable network, showed the film for the first time. The film was the first feature in TNT's Saturday Night New Classics. A 2004 Sunday Times article suggested that TNT aired the film frequently from then on, about once every two months.[2] TV airings of the film accrued record breaking numbers.[4]The score was composed by Thomas Newman and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Score in 1994, which was his first Oscar nomination. The majority of the score consists of dark piano music, which plays along the main character's role at Shawshank. The main theme ("End Titles" on the soundtrack album) is perhaps best known to modern audiences as the inspirational sounding music from many movie trailers dealing with inspirational, dramatic, or romantic films in much the same way that James Horner's driving music from the end of Aliens is used in many movie trailers for action films. A central scene in the film features the "Letter Duet" ("Canzonetta sull'aria") from Mozart's The Marriage of Figaro.In 1998, Shawshank was not listed in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies, but nine years later (2007), it was #72 on the revised list, outranking both Forrest Gump (#76) and Pulp Fiction (#94), the two most critically acclaimed movies from the year of Shawshank's release. In 1999, film critic Roger Ebert listed Shawshank on his "Great Movies" list.[19]Readers of Empire magazine voted the film as the best film of the 1990s, and it placed number 4 on Empire's list of "The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time" in 2008.[4][20] In March 2011, the film was voted by BBC Radio 1 and BBC Radio 1Xtra listeners as their favorite film of all time.[21]Tim RobbinsMorgan FreemanColumbia Pictures (US)Rank Organisation(UK)September 23, 1994(1994-09-23) (limited)October 14, 1994(1994-10-14) (North America)1 Plot2 Cast3 Themes4 Production5 Reception

5.1 Box office
5.2 Critical response
5.3 Accolades
5.4 Home media

5.1 Box office5.2 Critical response5.3 Accolades5.4 Home media6 Music7 Legacy8 See also9 References10 Further reading11 External links5.1 Box office5.2 Critical response5.3 Accolades5.4 Home mediaTim Robbins as Andy Dufresne: A well educated banker imprisoned for the murder of his wife and her lover.Morgan Freeman as Ellis Boyd "Red" Redding: Andy's friend and fellow prison inmate, convicted of murder in 1927. Before Freeman was cast, Clint Eastwood, Harrison Ford, Paul Newman, and Robert Redford were each considered for the role. Although written as a middle-aged Irishman with greying red hair (as in the novella), Darabont cast Freeman for his authoritative presence and demeanor; he could not see anyone else as Red.[3] The short dialogue with Andy is a jest towards this casting decision as Red when asked about the origin of his nickname answers "Maybe it's because I'm Irish."[4]Bob Gunton as Warden Samuel Norton: The pious, but corrupt warden of Shawshank Penetentiary.William Sadler as Heywood: A member of Red's gang of long-serving convicts.Clancy Brown as Captain Byron Hadley: The sadistic captain of the prison guards. Brown declined the offer to study real-life prison guards as preparation for his role, because he did not want to base it on any one person.[5]Gil Bellows as Tommy Williams: A young convict taken under Andy's tutelage.James Whitmore as Brooks Hatlen: An elderly convict and the prison librarian. Darabont cast Whitmore because he was one of his favorite character actors.[3]List of films considered the bestList of number-one DVDs of 2002 (UK)List of number-one DVDs of 2006 (UK)Mark Kermode (2003). The Shawshank Redemption. London: British Film Institute. ISBN978-0-85170-968-0. http://books.google.com/?id=hYBZAAAAMAAJ.Turner, Cory (August 4, 2011). "On Location: Mansfield, Ohio's 'Shawshank' Industry". All Things Considered. National Public Radio. http://www.npr.org/2011/08/04/138986482/on-location-mansfield-ohios-shawshank-industry.The Shawshank Redemption at AllRoviThe Shawshank Redemption at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Shawshank Redemption at Box Office MojoThe Shawshank Redemption at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Shawshank Redemption at Rotten TomatoesWuthering Heights is a 1939 American black-and-white film directed by William Wyler and produced by Samuel Goldwyn. It is based on the novel, Wuthering Heights by Emily Bront. The film depicts only sixteen of the novel's thirty-four chapters, eliminating the second generation of characters. The novel was adapted for the screen by Charles MacArthur, Ben Hecht and John Huston. The film won the 1939 New York Film Critics Award for Best Film. It earned nominations for eight Academy Awards,[2] including for Best Picture and Best Actor. The 1939 Academy Award for Best Cinematography, black-and-white category, was awarded to Gregg Toland for his work.In 2007, Wuthering Heights was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".A traveler named Lockwood (Miles Mander) is caught in the snow and stays at the estate of Wuthering Heights, despite the cold behavior of his aged host, Heathcliff (Laurence Olivier). Late that night, after being shown into an upstairs room that was once a bridal chamber, Lockwood is awakened by a cold draft and finds the window shutter flapping back and forth. Just as he is about to close it, he feels an icy hand clutching his and sees a woman outside calling, "Heathcliff, let me in! I'm out on the moors. It's Cathy!" Lockwood calls Heathcliff and tells him what he saw, whereupon the enraged Heathcliff throws him out of the room. As soon as Lockwood is gone, Heathcliff frantically calls out to Cathy, runs down the stairs and out of the house, into the snowstorm.Ellen, the housekeeper (Flora Robson), tells the amazed Lockwood that he has seen the ghost of Cathy Earnshaw, Heathcliff's great love, who died years ago. When Lockwood says that he doesn't believe in ghosts, Ellen tells him that he might if she told him the story of Cathy. And so the main plot begins as a long flashback.The plot then flashes back forty years. As a boy, Heathcliff is found on the streets by Mr. Earnshaw (Cecil Kellaway), who brings him home to live with his two children, Cathy and Hindley. At first reluctant, Cathy eventually welcomes Heathcliff and they become very close, but Hindley treats him as an outcast, especially after Mr. Earnshaw dies. About ten years later, the now-grown Heathcliff and Cathy (Merle Oberon) have fallen in love and are meeting secretly on Peniston Crag (because of censorship, their relationship in the film is kept strictly platonic in spite of the fact that they do kiss, while in the novel it is implied that their relationship was sexual). Hindley (Hugh Williams) has become dissolute and tyrannical and hates Heathcliff. One night, as Cathy and Heathcliff are out together, they hear music and realize that their neighbors, the Lintons, are giving a party. Cathy and Heathcliff sneak to the Lintons and climb over their garden wall, but the dogs are alerted and Cathy is injured. Heathcliff is forced to leave Cathy in their care. Enraged that Cathy would be so entranced by the Linton's glamor and wealth, he blames them for her injury and curses them.Months later, Cathy is fully recuperated but still living at the Lintons. Edgar Linton (David Niven) has fallen in love with Cathy and soon proposes, and after Edgar takes her back to Wuthering Heights, she tells Ellen what has happened. Ellen reminds her about Heathcliff, but Cathy flippantly remarks that it would degrade her to marry him. Heathcliff overhears and leaves. Cathy realizes that Heathcliff has overheard, is overcome by guilt and runs out after him into a raging storm. Edgar finds her and nurses her back to health once again, and soon he and Cathy marry.Heathcliff was thought to have disappeared forever but returns two years later, now wealthy and elegant. He has refined his appearance and manners in order to both impress and spite Cathy and secretly buys Wuthering Heights from Hindley, who has become an alcoholic. In order to further spite Cathy, Heathcliff begins courting Edgar's naive sister, Isabella (Geraldine Fitzgerald), and eventually marries her. The brokenhearted Cathy soon falls gravely ill. Heathcliff rushes to her side against the wishes of the now disillusioned and bitter Isabella, and Cathy dies in Heathcliff's arms.The flashback ends and we return to Ellen finishing her story. The family doctor, Dr. Kenneth (Donald Crisp), bursts in, saying that he (Dr. Kenneth) must be mad, having seen Heathcliff in the snow walking with his arm around a woman. Ellen exclaims, "It was Cathy!" and Dr. Kenneth says, "No, I don't know who it was", and tells them that he was then thrown from his horse. As he drew closer, he found Heathcliff lying in the snow. The woman had disappeared and there was no sign of her, and only Heathcliff's footprints appeared in the snow, not hers. Lockwood asks, "Is he dead?", and Dr. Kenneth nods, but Ellen says, "No, not dead, Dr. Kenneth. And not alone. He's with her. They've only just begun to live."The last thing we see in the film are the ghosts of Heathcliff and Cathy, walking in the snow, superimposed over a shot of Peniston Crag.The film omitted any mention of Cathy's daughter and Heathcliff's son, both of whom play a major role in the last portion of the book. In the film, neither Heathcliff nor Cathy has any children. Isabella does not leave Heathcliff, or die, unlike in the novel where she manages to escape him and later passes away. Instead she remains his troubled, but loyal, wife even when Mr Lockwood visits.The project was initially intended as a vehicle for Merle Oberon, who was under contract with Goldwyn at the time. However, when Laurence Olivier was cast as Heathcliff, Vivien Leigh wanted to play the lead role alongside her then-lover and future husband.[3] Studio executives felt the role could not go to an actress who was largely unknown in America, but they did offer Leigh the part of Isabella Linton. She declined, and Geraldine Fitzgerald was cast. Leigh was cast in Gone with the Wind that same year, which won her an Academy Award for Best Actress; Merle Oberon did not receive a nomination for her performance.There were clashes on the set between actors and the director. Both of the leading players began work on the film miserable at having to leave their loved ones back in the United Kingdom; Olivier missed his fiance Vivien Leigh and Oberon had recently fallen in love with film producer Alexander Korda.[4] Merle Oberon and Laurence Olivier also apparently detested each other. Witnesses recall Oberon scolding Olivier for accidentally spitting on her during a particularly romantic balcony scene. Oberon shouted back to Wyler, "Tell him to stop spitting at me!" Olivier retorted by shouting, "What's a little spit for Chrissake, between actors? You bloody little idiot, how dare you speak to me...?" Oberon ran crying from the set after the outburst, and Wyler insisted Olivier apologize to her, which upset Olivier greatly.[5]Olivier also found himself becoming increasingly annoyed with William Wyler's exhausting style of film-making. After countless takes of one scene, he is said to have exclaimed, "For God's sake, I did it sitting down. I did it with a smile. I did it with a smirk. I did it scratching my ear. I did it with my back to the camera. How do you want me to do it?" Wyler's retort was, "I want it better."[5] Olivier in later years was more kind in his opinion about Wyler. In both his autobiography and his book, On Acting, he credits William Wyler with teaching him how to act in films, as opposed to on the stage, and for giving him a new respect for films. Olivier had tended to "ham it up", as if he were playing to the second balcony, but Wyler showed him how to act more subtly.In the final sequence of Wuthering Heights, the spirits of Heathcliff and Cathy are seen walking together hand-in-hand, obviously in love. This scene is not found in the book and, according to literary critic John Sutherland, was likely the stark opposite of what Bront intended the reader to understand. He contends that a contemporary reader would not have seen Cathy's ghost's actions as a gesture of undying love for Heathcliff but one of towering, protective rage; Cathy haunted Heathcliff to death only to prevent him from cheating her daughter out of her inheritance.[6] Director Wyler hated the idea of the after-life scene and didn't want to do it but producer Samuel Goldwyn vetoed him, and the scene was added after primary filming was complete. As Laurence Olivier and Merle Oberon had already moved on to other projects, doubles had to be used. Goldwyn subsequently claimed, "I made Wuthering Heights, Wyler only directed it." [7] Goldwyn claimed that Wuthering Heights was his favorite of all his productions.[4] Sutherland writes that this change to the ending has influenced how students view the novel and especially Cathy, who comes across as more passive and accepting of abuse than Bront may have envisioned.[6] Remakes of Wuthering Heights have also reinforced the idea of Cathy and Heathcliff being eternally in love, and Sutherland's opinion is distinctly in the minority.David Niven remembers the filming of Merle Oberon's deathbed scenes (recorded in his bestselling book, The Moon's a Balloon) as less than romantic. He had been given a substance to help it appear as if he were crying, which instead had the effect of making "green goo" come out of his nose.American Film Institute ListsStreaming audioApril 13, 1939(1939-04-13)1 Plot2 Omissions from the novel3 Cast4 Production

4.1 Accolades
4.2 Other Honors

4.1 Accolades4.2 Other Honors5 Miscellaneous6 References7 External links4.1 Accolades4.2 Other HonorsLaurence Olivier as HeathcliffMerle Oberon as Catherine Earnshaw LintonDavid Niven as Edgar LintonFlora Robson as Ellen DeanDonald Crisp as Dr. KennethGeraldine Fitzgerald as Isabella LintonLeo G. Carroll as JosephHugh Williams as Hindley EarnshawMiles Mander as LockwoodCecil Kellaway as EarnshawCecil Humphreys as Judge LintonSarita Wooton as Cathy - as a Child (as Sarita Wooten)Rex Downing as Heathcliff - as a ChildDouglas Scott as Hindley - as a ChildVernon Downing as GilesAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #73AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions - #15AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"No matter what I ever do or say, Heathcliff, this is me -- now -- standing on this hill with you. This is me, forever." - Nominated[8]

"No matter what I ever do or say, Heathcliff, this is me -- now -- standing on this hill with you. This is me, forever." - Nominated[8]AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - Nominated[9]AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - Nominated[10]"No matter what I ever do or say, Heathcliff, this is me -- now -- standing on this hill with you. This is me, forever." - Nominated[8]The Mitchell Camera Corporation selected cinematographer Gregg Toland and Wuthering Heights to be the first to use their new Mitchell BNC camera. This camera model would become the studio standard.Ronald Colman, Douglas Fairbanks and Robert Newton were considered for the role of Heathcliff.[4]The novel takes place in the late 18th and early 19th century. However, the film places the action in the mid-19th century, around the time of the novel's publication. Sarah Berry writes that Samuel Goldwyn deliberately chose to do this because he thought "Civil War" fashions were more attractive than Regency fashions.[11] Other writers have claimed that Goldwyn was short on funds and had to recycle costumes from a Civil War drama.The film is rated G in New Zealand.Wuthering Heights at the Internet Movie DatabaseWuthering Heights at the TCM Movie DatabaseWuthering Heights at AllRoviWuthering Heights at Rotten TomatoesWuthering Heights on Lux Radio Theater: September 18, 1939Wuthering Heights on Lux Radio Theater: November 4, 1940Wuthering Heights on Ford Theater: April 1, 1949Wuthering Heights on Screen Directors Playhouse: August 9, 1951The Gold Rush is a 1925 silent film comedy written, produced, directed by, and starring Charlie Chaplin in his Little Tramp role. The film also stars Georgia Hale, Mack Swain, Tom Murray, Henry Bergman, and Malcolm Waite.Chaplin declared several times that this was the film that he most wanted to be remembered for.[1]Though a silent film, it received an Academy Awards nomination for Best Sound Recording (see re-release below).The Tramp (Charlie Chaplin) travels to the Yukon to take part in the Klondike Gold Rush. Bad weather strands him in a remote cabin with a prospector who has found a large gold deposit (Mack Swain) and an escaped fugitive (Tom Murray), after which they part ways, with the prospector and the fugitive fighting over the prospector's claim, ending with the prospector receiving a blow to the head and the fugitive falling off a cliff to his death. The Tramp eventually finds himself in a gold rush town where he ultimately decides to give up prospecting.After taking a job looking after another prospector's cabin, he falls in love with a lonely saloon girl (Georgia Hale) whom he mistakenly thinks has fallen in love with him. He soon finds himself waylaid by the prospector he met earlier, who has developed amnesia and needs the Tramp to help him find his claim by leading him back to the first cabin.One sequence was altered in the 1942 re-release so that instead of the Tramp finding a note from Georgia which he mistakenly believes is for him, he actually receives the note from her. Another major alteration is the ending, in which the now-wealthy Tramp originally gave Georgia a lingering kiss on board ship; the sound version ends before this scene. Now, the two share a romantic moment by the old house.Lita Grey was originally cast as the leading lady. Chaplin married Grey in mid-1924, and she was replaced in the film by Georgia Hale. Although photographs of Grey exist in the role, documentaries such as Unknown Chaplin and Chaplin Today: The Gold Rush do not contain any film footage of her, indicating no such footage survives.Chaplin attempted to film many of the scenes on location near Truckee, California, in early 1924. He abandoned most of this footage (which included him being chased through the snow by Big Jim, instead of just around the hut as in the final cut), retaining only the film's opening scene. The final film was shot on the backlot and stages at Chaplin's Hollywood studio, where elaborate Klondike sets were constructed.Discussing the making of the film in the documentary series Unknown Chaplin, Hale revealed that she had idolized Chaplin since childhood and that the final scene of the original version, in which the two kiss, reflected the state of their relationship by that time (Chaplin's marriage to Lita Grey having collapsed during production of the film). Hale discusses her relationship with Chaplin in her memoir Charlie Chaplin: Intimate Close-Ups.The Gold Rush was a huge success in the US and worldwide. It is the fifth highest grossing silent film in cinema history, taking in more than $4,250,001 at the box office in 1926, and the highest grossing silent comedy. Chaplin proclaimed at the time of its release that this was the film for which he wanted to be remembered.In 1942, Chaplin released a new version of The Gold Rush, taking the original silent 1925 film and composing and recording a musical score, adding a narration which he recorded himself, and tightening the editing which reduced the film's running time by several minutes. The film is also shortened by being run at 'sound speed', i.e. 24 frames per second; like most silent movies it was originally shot and exhibited at a slower speed. As noted above, Chaplin also changed some plot points. Besides removing the kiss at the end, another change eliminated a subplot in which Charlie is tricked into believing Georgia is in love with him by Georgia's paramour, Jack.The new music score by Max Terr and the sound recording by James L. Fields were nominated for Academy Awards in 1943.[2]The Gold Rush was the first of Chaplin's classic silents that he converted to a sound version in this fashion.[3] As revealed in the 2003 DVD release, the reissue of The Gold Rush also served to preserve most of the footage from the original film, as even the DVD-restored print of the 1925 original shows noticeable degradation of image and missing frames, artifacts not in evidence in the 1942 version.In its original 1925 release, The Gold Rush was generally praised by critics. Mordaunt Hall wrote in The New York Times:Here is a comedy with streaks of poetry, pathos, tenderness, linked with brusqueness and boisterousness. It is the outstanding gem of all Chaplin's pictures, as it has more thought and originality than even such masterpieces of mirth as The Kid and Shoulder Arms.[4]At the 1958 Brussels World Fair, critics rated it the second greatest film in history, behind only Eisenstein's The Battleship Potemkin. In 1992 The Gold Rush was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".In 1953, the original 1925 film possibly entered the public domain in the USA, as Chaplin did not renew its copyright registration in the 28th year after publication in accordance to American law.[5] As such, the film was once widely available on home video in that country. In the years since, Chaplin's estate has blocked the unauthorized releases of The Gold Rush in the United States:However, according to copyrightdata.com, the film was first screened in the USA, thereby disqualifying reciprocal copyright recognition under 104A(h)(6)(D); and the film exceeded the 30-day rule (more than 30 days between the US and British screenings), thus also disqualifying it for reciprocal-nation copyright protection.[6]The 1942 revision that included music and spoken dialogue, is under copyright.MK2 Editions and Warner Home Video currently holds DVD distribution rights. A Blu-ray edition has been recently released by The Criterion Collection.The "roll dance" the tramp character performs in the film is considered one of the most memorable scenes in film history, although Roscoe Arbuckle did something similar in the 1917 movie The Rough House which co-starred Buster Keaton. The bit was briefly homaged by Curly Howard in the 1935 Three Stooges film Pardon My Scotch. Anna Karina's character in Bande  Part references it before the famous dance scene. In more recent times, it was replicated by Robert Downey Jr. in his lead role as Charles Chaplin in the 1992 Chaplin, Johnny Depp's character in the 1993 film Benny and Joon, Grampa Simpson in the 1994 episode of The Simpsons entitled "Lady Bouvier's Lover" and by Amy Adams' character in The Muppets.American Film Institute recognitionJune 26, 1925(1925-06-26)1 Plot2 Cast3 Background

3.1 1942 re-release

3.1 1942 re-release4 Critical reception5 Copyright and home video6 Pop culture references7 See also8 References9 External links3.1 1942 re-releaseCharlie Chaplin as The Tramp (labeled as The Lone Prospector)Georgia Hale as GeorgiaMack Swain as Big Jim McKayTom Murray as Black LarsenMalcolm Waite as Jack CameronHenry Bergman as Hank Curtis1998 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #742000 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs #252007 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #58Klondike Gold RushWatch filmThe Gold Rush at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Gold Rush at Rotten TomatoesThe Gold Rush at AllRoviThe Gold Rush at Box Office MojoThe Gold Rush at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Greatest Films: The Gold RushBibliographyDances with Wolves is a 1990 American epic western film directed, produced by, and starring Kevin Costner. It is a film adaptation of the 1988 book of the same name by Michael Blake and tells the story of a Union Army lieutenant who travels to the American frontier to find a military post, and his dealings with a group of Lakota Indians.Costner developed the film over 5 years, with a budget of $22 million. Dances with Wolves had high production values[1] and won seven Academy Awards including Best Picture and the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  Drama. Much of the dialogue is spoken in Lakota with English subtitles. It was shot in South Dakota and Wyoming.It is credited as a leading influence for the revitalization of the Western genre of filmmaking in Hollywood. In 2007, Dances with Wolves was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."[2]In 1863, First Lieutenant John J. Dunbar (Kevin Costner) is injured in the American Civil War. Rather than having his leg amputated, he takes a horse and rides up to the Confederate front lines, distracting them in the process. The roused Union army then attacks and the battle ends a Confederate rout. Dunbar survives, is allowed to properly recover, receives a citation for bravery and is awarded Cisco, the horse who carried him, as well as his choice of posting. Dunbar requests a transfer to the western frontier so he can see its vast terrain before it goes. Dunbar arrives at his new post, Fort Sedgwick, but finds it abandoned and in disrepair. Despite the threat of nearby Native American tribes, he elects to stay and man the post himself. He begins rebuilding and restocking the fort and prefers the solitude afforded him, recording many of his observations in his journal.Dunbar initially encounters his Sioux neighbors when several attempts are made to steal his horse and intimidate him. In response, Dunbar decides to seek out the Sioux camp in an attempt to establish a dialogue. On his way he comes across Stands With A Fist (Mary McDonnell), who has injured herself in mourning of her deceased husband. She is the white adopted daughter of the tribe's medicine man Kicking Bird (Graham Greene), her original family being killed by the aggressive Pawnee tribe when she was young. Dunbar returns her to the Sioux to be treated, which changes their attitude toward him. Eventually, Dunbar establishes a rapport with Kicking Bird and warrior Wind In His Hair (Rodney A. Grant) who equally wish to communicate. Initially the language barrier frustrates them, so Stands With A Fist, though with difficulty remembering her English, acts as translator.Dunbar finds himself drawn to the lifestyle and customs of the tribe and begins spending most of his time with them. Learning their language, he becomes a hero among the Sioux and is accepted as an honored guest after he locates a migrating herd of buffalo and participates in the hunt. When at Fort Sedgwick, Dunbar also befriends a wolf he dubs "Two Socks" for its white forepaws. When the Sioux observe Dunbar and Two Socks chasing each other, they give him his Sioux name "Dances with Wolves". During this time, Dunbar also forges a romantic relationship with Stands with a Fist and helps defend the village from an attack by the rival Pawnee tribe. Dunbar eventually wins Kicking Bird's approval to marry Stands with a Fist, and abandons Fort Sedgwick.Because of the growing Pawnee and white threat, Chief Ten Bears (Floyd Red Crow Westerman) decides to move the tribe to its winter camp. Dunbar decides to accompany them but must first retrieve his journal from Fort Sedgewick. However, when he arrives he finds it occupied by the U.S. Army. Because of his Sioux clothing, the soldiers mistake him for a Native and open fire, killing Cisco and capturing Dunbar. Sgt Baur (Larry Joshua) interrogates him, but Dunbar cannot prove his situation as Corporal Spivey (Tony Pierce) had secretly stolen his journal. As a result, along with Dunbar's refusal to serve as an interpreter to the tribes, he is accused of treason and transported back east as a prisoner. While traveling in the armed caravan, the soldiers kill Two Socks when the wolf attempts to follow Dunbar.Eventually the Sioux track the convoy, killing the soldiers and freeing Dunbar. At the winter camp, Dunbar decides to leave with Stands With A Fist since his status will put the tribe in danger. As they leave, Wind In His Hair shouts across to Dunbar, reminding him of their friendship. U.S. troops are seen searching the mountains but are unable to locate them, while a lone wolf howls in the distance. An epilogue states that thirteen years later the last remnants of Sioux were subjugated to the American government, ending the conquest of the Western frontier states and the livelihoods of the tribes in the plains.Originally written as a spec script by Michael Blake, it went unsold in the mid-1980s. It was Kevin Costner who, in early 1986 (when he was relatively unknown), encouraged Blake to turn the screenplay into a novel, to improve its chances of being adapted into a film. The novel manuscript of Dances with Wolves was rejected by numerous publishers but finally published in paperback in 1988. As a novel, the rights were purchased by Costner, with an eye on directing it. Actual production lasted for four months, from July 18 to November 23, 1989. Most of the movie was filmed on location in South Dakota, mainly near Pierre and Rapid City, with a few scenes filmed in Wyoming. Specific locations included the Badlands National Park, the Black Hills, the Sage Creek Wilderness Area, and the Belle Fourche River area. The buffalo hunt scenes were filmed at the Triple U Buffalo Ranch outside Fort Pierre, South Dakota, as were the Fort Sedgwick scenes, the set being constructed on the property.[3]Production delays were numerous, because of South Dakota's unpredictable weather, the difficulty of "directing" barely trainable wolves, and the complexity of the Indian battle scenes. Particularly arduous was the film's centerpiece buffalo hunt sequence: this elaborate chase was filmed over three weeks using 100 Indian stunt riders and an actual stampeding herd of several thousand buffalo. During one shot, Costner (who did almost all of his own horseback riding) was "T-boned" by another rider and knocked off his horse, nearly breaking his back. The accident is captured in The Creation of an Epic, the behind-the-scenes documentary on the Dances with Wolves Special Edition DVD.According to the documentary, none of the buffalo were computer animated (CGI was then in its infancy) and only a few were animatronic or otherwise fabricated. In fact, Costner and crew employed the largest domestically owned buffalo ranch, with two of the domesticated buffalo being borrowed from Neil Young; this was the herd used for the buffalo hunt sequence.Budget overruns were inevitable, owing to Costner's breaking several unspoken Hollywood "rules" for first-time directors: traditionally, they avoid both shooting outside and working with children and animals as much as possible. As a result, late in the production Costner was forced to add $3 million personally in out-of-pocket money to the film's original $15-million budget. Referring to the infamous fiasco of Michael Cimino's 1980 Heaven's Gate, considered the most mismanaged Western in film history, Costner's project was satirically dubbed "Kevin's Gate" by Hollywood critics and pundits skeptical of a three-hour, partially subtitled Western by a novice filmmaker.The film changed the novel's Comanche Indians to Sioux, because of the larger number of Sioux speakers.[citation needed] Lakota Sioux language instructor Doris Leader Charge (19312001) was the on-set Lakota dialogue coach and also portrayed Pretty Shield, wife of Chief Ten Bears.Despite portraying the adopted daughter of Graham Greene's character Kicking Bird, Mary McDonnell, then 37, was actually two months older than Greene, and less than two years younger than Tantoo Cardinal, the actress playing her adoptive mother. In addition, McDonnell was extremely nervous about shooting her sex scene with Kevin Costner, requesting it be toned down to a more modest version than what was scripted.Defying expectation, Dances with Wolves proved instantly popular, eventually making $184 million in U.S. box office sales, and $424 million in total sales worldwide.[4] The movie won the Best Picture Academy Award against strong competition, notably Martin Scorsese's Goodfellas.As of 2011, the film holds a positive review score of 78% on Rotten Tomatoes.[5] Because of the film's popular and lasting impact, the Sioux Nation adopted Costner as an honorary member.[6]In 2007, the Library of Congress selected Dances with Wolves for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.[2]Native American activist and actor Russell Means was less kind about some aspects of the film's technical accuracy. In 2009, he said "Remember Lawrence of Arabia? That was Lawrence of the Plains. The odd thing about making that movie is that they had a woman teaching the actors the Lakota language, but Lakota has a male-gendered language and a female-gendered language. Some of the Indians and Kevin Costner were speaking in the feminine way. When I went to see it with a bunch of Lakota guys, we were laughing."[7]According to other sources the gender specific Lakota words were used correctly in the movie. Some of the criticism was inspired by the fact that the pronunciation is not authentic since none of the actors except for one were native speakers of the language. However, making the movie with dialogues in the native Language has been lauded as a remarkable achievement.[8]It's not impossible to conceive that the character Stands With a Fist would have been taught the feminine side of the language, and that this is what she would have been most familiar with using. As an interpreter struggling with a personal language barrier, she would have used her most familiar form of language and so most of the interpretation would have been through the Lakota feminine tongue. As a result, the Lakota would have come to use the feminine tongue with Dances With Wolves as a matter of convenience and also because a person with more mastery of the masculine tongue who also knew English would not have been in the offering. Therefore, it is entirely realistic to assume that the Lakota would have come to almost exclusively rely on the feminine tongue when speaking with Dances With Wolves.63rd Academy Awards: In addition to becoming the first Western film to win an Academy Award for Best Picture since 1931's Cimarron,[9] Dances with Wolves won the following additional Oscars:[10]Dances with Wolves was also nominated in the following categories:American Film Institute recognition:Other accolades:The Holy Road, a well-received sequel novel by Michael Blake, the author of both the original Dances with Wolves novel and the movie screenplay, was published in 2001.[16] It picks up eleven years after Dances with Wolves. John Dunbar is still married to Stands with a Fist and they have three children. Stands with a Fist and one of the children are kidnapped by a party of white rangers and Dances with Wolves must mount a rescue mission. As of 2007, Blake was writing a film adaptation, although Kevin Costner was not yet attached to the project.[17] In the end, however, Costner stated he would not take part in this production. Viggo Mortensen has been rumored to be attached to the project, playing Dunbar.[18]Judith A. Boughter wrote: "The problem with Costner's approach is that all of the Sioux are heroic, while the Pawnees are portrayed as stereotypical villains. Most accounts of Sioux-Pawnee relations see the Pawnees as victims of the more powerful Sioux."[19]St. David's Field, Tennessee does not exist nor did it in 1863. As the opening battle is a minor portion of the film, it was considered undesirable to name an actual historical battle, which might result in knowledgeable viewers taking exception to fictional events.[citation needed]Fort Sedgwick, Colorado was erected as Camp Rankin and renamed for General John Sedgwick (18131864). Sedgwick was killed May 9, 1864, at the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House, Virginia. Fort Sedgwick served as an army post from July 1864 to May 1871. John Sedgwick did erect a fort in Kansas in 1860.Fort Hays, Kansas was named for General Alexander Hays (18191864). Hays was killed May 5, 1864, in the Battle of the Wilderness, Virginia. Fort Hays served as an army post from October 11, 1865, to November 8, 1889.There was a real John Dunbar who worked as a missionary for the Pawnee in the 1830s40s, and sided with the Indians in a dispute with government farmers and a local Indian agent.[20] It is unclear if the name "John Dunbar" was chosen as a corollary to the real historical figure.The fictional Lieutenant John Dunbar of 1863 is correctly shown in the film wearing a gold bar on his officer shoulder straps, indicating his rank as a First Lieutenant. From 1836 to 1872, the rank of First Lieutenant was indicated by a gold bar; after 1872, the rank was indicated by a silver bar. Similarly, Captain Cargill is correctly depicted wearing a pair of gold bars, indicating the rank of Captain at that time.[21]The description at the finale is correct; 13 years after the film is set, the last band of free Sioux were forced into a humiliating surrender at Fort Robinson, Nebraska, and the dominance and prevalence of the Plains Indians was over.The first Laserdisc release of Dances with Wolves was on November 15, 1991, by Orion Home Video on a two-disc extended play laserdisc set.[citation needed]The first Dances with Wolves VHS version was released in 1991. Dances with Wolves has been released to several VHS versions. The limited collector's edition set comes with two VHS tapes, six high gloss 14" x 11" Lobby Photos, Dances with Wolves The Illustrated Story Of The Epic Film book, and an organized collector's edition storage case.Dances with Wolves has been released to DVD on four occasions. The first on November 17, 1998, on a single disc. The second on February 16, 1999, as a two disc set with a DTS Soundtrack. The third was released on May 20, 2003, as a two-disc set featuring the Extended Edition. The fourth was released on May 25, 2004, as a single disc in full frame.Dances with Wolves has been released on Blu-ray in Germany on December 5, 2008, in France on the April 15, 2009, in the United Kingdom on the October 26, 2009, and in the United States on January 11, 2011. The German, French, and American releases feature the Extended Edition, while the British release features the theatrical cut.One year after original theatrical release of Dances with Wolves, a 4-hour version of the film opened at select theaters in London. This longer cut was dubbed Dances with Wolves: The Special Edition, and it restored nearly an hour's worth of scenes that had been removed to keep the original film's running time under 3 hours.In a letter to British film reviewers, director Kevin Costner and producer Jim Wilson addressed their reasons for presenting a longer version of the film:[22]The genesis of the 4-hour version of the film was further explained in an article for Entertainment Weekly that appeared only 10 months after the premiere of the original film:While the small screen has come to serve as a second chance for filmmakers who can't seem to let their babies go, Kevin Costner and his producing partner, Jim Wilson, hope that their newly completed version will hit theater screens first:[23]This Special Edition was eventually broadcast in 1993 for the American network television premiere at ABC. For the DVD release, the Special Edition was dubbed an Extended Cut. For Blu-ray, the same cut was renamed Director's Cut.Director Kevin Costner would later claim that he did not work on the creation of the 4-hour cut at all.[24]Jim WilsonKevin CostnerJake EbertsKevin CostnerMary McDonnellGraham GreeneRodney A. GrantNovember 21, 1990(1990-11-21)EnglishLakotaPawnee1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception5 Awards and honors6 Sequel7 Historical references8 Home video editions9 Alternate versions10 Soundtrack11 Bibliography12 References13 External linksKevin Costner as Lt. John J. Dunbar / Dances with Wolves / Narrator (Lakota: ugmnit Tka b Wah)Mary McDonnell as Stands With A Fist (Lakota: Nappea Ni Wi)Graham Greene as Kicking Bird (Lakota: Zitk Nagwka)Rodney A. Grant as Wind In His Hair (Lakota: Peh Otte)Floyd Red Crow Westerman as Chief Ten Bears (Lakota: Mat Wikmna)Tantoo Cardinal as Black Shawl (Lakota: in Spa Wi)Jimmy Herman as Stone Calf (Lakota: ya Ptehala)Nathan Lee Chasing His Horse as Smiles A Lot (Lakota: I Sa)Michael Spears as Otter (Lakota: Pt)Jason R. Lone Hill as Worm (Lakota: Waglla)Charles Rocket as Lt. ElginRobert Pastorelli as TimmonsLarry Joshua as Sgt. BauerTony Pierce as SpiveyKirk Baltz as EdwardsTom Everett as Sgt. PepperMaury Chaykin as Maj. FambroughWes Studi as the fiercest PawneeWayne Grace as The MajorBest Director  Kevin CostnerBest Adapted Screenplay  Michael BlakeBest Cinematography  Dean SemlerBest Film Editing  Neil TravisBest Sound  Russell Williams II, Jeffrey Perkins, Bill W. Benton and Gregory H. WatkinsBest Original Score  John BarryBest Actor in a Leading Role  Kevin CostnerBest Actor in a Supporting Role  Graham GreeneBest Actress in a Supporting Role  Mary McDonnellBest Art Direction  Jeffrey Beecroft and Lisa DeanBest Costume Design  Elsa ZamparelliAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - #75AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Lt. John W. Dunbar - Nominated Hero[11]

Lt. John W. Dunbar - Nominated Hero[11]AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - Nominated[12]AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers - #59AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - Nominated[13]AFI's 10 Top 10 - Nominated Western and Epic Film[14]Lt. John W. Dunbar - Nominated Hero[11]Golden Globe for Best Motion Picture  Drama  Jim Wilson and Kevin CostnerGolden Globe for Best Director  Kevin CostnerGolden Globe for Best Screenplay  Michael BlakeSilver Bear for an outstanding single achievement - Kevin Costner at the 41st Berlin International Film Festival[15]John Barry composed the Oscar-winning score. It was issued in 1990 initially and again in 1995 with bonus tracks and in 2004 with the score "in its entirety" (although, in reality, approximately 25 minutes of the score is still missing from the 2004 release).[citation needed]Peter Buffett scored the "Fire Dance" scene.Blake, Michael. Dances with Wolves. Ballantine Books. ISBN0-449-00075-3.Blake, Michael. The Holy Road. ZOVA Books. ISBN978-0-615-51057-6.Archived website http://web.archive.org/web/*/http://www.danceswithwolves.net/Dances with Wolves at the Internet Movie DatabaseDances with Wolves at the TCM Movie DatabaseDances with Wolves at AllRoviDances with Wolves at Rotten TomatoesIn the Heat of the Night is a 1967 mystery film based on the John Ball novel of the same name published in 1965, which tells the story of Virgil Tibbs, a black police detective from Philadelphia, who becomes involved in a murder investigation in a racist small town in Mississippi. The film won five Academy Awards, including Best Picture. It stars Sidney Poitier, Rod Steiger, and Warren Oates, and was directed by Norman Jewison.The film was followed by two sequels, They Call Me MISTER Tibbs! in 1970, and The Organization in 1971. In 1988, it also became the basis of a television series adaptation of the same name.Although the film was set in the fictional Mississippi town of Sparta (with supposedly no connection to the real Sparta, Mississippi, an unincorporated community), part of the movie was filmed in Sparta, Illinois, where many of the film's landmarks can still be seen. The quote "They call me Mister Tibbs!" was listed as number 16 on the American Film Institute's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes, a list of top film quotes.Mr. Colbert, a wealthy man from Chicago who was planning to build a factory in Sparta, Mississippi, is found murdered. White police Chief Bill Gillespie (Rod Steiger) comes under pressure to quickly find his killer. African-American northerner Virgil Tibbs (Sidney Poitier), passing through, is picked up at the train station between trains with a substantial amount of cash in his wallet. Gillespie, prejudiced against blacks, jumps to the conclusion he has his culprit but is embarrassed to learn that Tibbs is an experienced Philadelphia homicide detective who is simply passing through town after visiting his mother. After the racist treatment he receives, Tibbs wants nothing more than to leave as quickly as possible, but his own chief, after questioning whether Tibbs himself is prejudiced, has him stay and help. The victim's widow, already frustrated by the ineptitude of the local police, is impressed by Tibbs' expertise when he clears another wrongly-accused suspect Gillespie has arrested on circumstantial evidence. She threatens to stop construction on the much-needed factory unless he leads the investigation. Unwilling to accept help but under orders from the town's mayor, Gillespie talks a reluctant Tibbs into working on the case.Despite the rocky start to their relationship, the two policemen are compelled to respect each other as they are forced to work together to solve the crime. Tibbs initially suspects wealthy plantation owner Eric Endicott, a racist who publically opposed the new factory. When he attempts to interrogate Endicott about Colbert, Endicott slaps him in the face. Tibbs slaps him back, which leads to Endicott sending a gang of hooligans after Tibbs. Gillespie rescues him from the fight and orders him to leave town for his own safety. Tibbs refuses to leave until he has solved the case.Tibbs asks Sam Wood, the officer who discovered the body, to retrace his steps the night of the murder. He and Gillespie accompany Sam on his patrol route, stopping at a diner where the counterman, Ralph Henshaw, refuses to serve Tibbs. When Tibbs notices that Sam has deliberately changed his route, Gillespie begins to suspect Sam of the crime. Tibbs indicates that he knows why Sam has changed his route but won't disclose the reason to Gillespie. When Gillespie discovers that Sam made a sizable deposit into his bank account the day after the murder (which Sam claims is gambling winnings) and Lloyd Purdy, a local, files charges against Sam for getting his 16-year-old sister Delores pregnant, Gillespie arrests Sam for the murder, despite Tibbs' protests. Purdy is insulted that Tibbs, a black man, was present for his sister's interrogation about her sexual encounter with Sam, and he gathers a mob to get his revenge on Tibbs.Tibbs is able to clear Sam by finding the original murder scene and pointing out that Sam would not have been able to drive two cars at the same time to dump the body and the victim's car while continuing on his patrol. Tibbs also admits that he knew immediately that Sam changed his route not to hide the fact that he was a murderer but a peeping Tom and declined to publically reveal this in order to spare Sam from embarrassment.Acting on a hunch, Tibbs tracks down the local back-room abortionist, who reveals that someone has paid for Delores Purdy to have an abortion. When Delores arrives, Tibbs pursues her outside, where he is confronted by the murderer, the diner counterman Ralph Henshaw. Purdy's mob tracks down Tibbs at this moment, and he is being held at gunpoint when he proves to Purdy that it was Ralph, not Sam, who got Delores pregnant. Purdy attacks Ralph, who kills Purdy in self-defense. Ralph is arrested and confesses to the murder of Colbert. He had attempted to rob Colbert to gain money to pay for Delores' abortion but accidentally killed him.His job done, Tibbs finally boards the Gulf, Mobile & Ohio train out of town, seen off by a more respectful Gillespie.The film contains the famous scene in which Tibbs and Gillespie visit the home of Eric Endicott to question him, following Tibbs' discovery of trace evidence in the murder victim's car. Upon discovering that Tibbs is suggesting he murdered Colbert, Endicott slaps Tibbs. Tibbs slaps him back. Reportedly, Tibbs' action was originally omitted from the screenplay, which stayed true to the novel with Tibbs not reacting to the slap. However, when Sidney Poitier read the script he was purportedly uncomfortable with that reaction, as it wasn't true to the values his parents instilled in him. He requested that the producers alter the scene to Tibbs slapping Endicott back. This was important due to the ongoing battle for civil rights, which was still raging in 1967, despite the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. This was one of the first times in any major motion picture where a black man reacted to provocation from a white man in such a way. Referring to the scene Poitier said, "[The scene] was almost not there. I said, 'I'll tell you what, I'll make this movie for you if you give me your absolute guarantee when he slaps me I slap him right back and you guarantee that it will play in every version of this movie.' I try not to do things that are against nature. I stayed away from films that didn't speak well of my values. I could only say yes to films if I passed it by my dad. I passed it by my father because I did not want ever to make a film that would not reflect positively on my father's life."However, Poitier's version of the story seems to be a bit of publicity fiction and is contradicted by Mark Harris in his meticulously researched book, Pictures at a Revolution. In the book Harris states that Stirling Silliphant's original draft contained both slaps, which is backed up by Jewison and Silliphant, and Harris states that copies of the original draft he obtained clearly contain the scene.The film contains two classic lines read by Poitier. When Gillespie sarcastically asks Tibbs what they call him in Philadelphia, he snaps, "They call me Mister Tibbs." Later, having deduced that the murderer is diner counterman Ralph Henshaw (introduced killing flies in the first scene of the film) and not police officer Sam Wood, Tibbs says, "Sam couldn't have driven two cars." At the very end of the film, as Poitier is boarding a train to leave the town, the last lines are uttered by Steiger and sum the growth of their relationship, yet maintain the standard of the South. He said, "Virgil? You take care now, y'hear," words to give support to the budding civil rights movement, exemplifying that, with effort, racial divisions are capable of being overcome.The film is also important for being the first major Hollywood film in color that was lit with proper consideration for a person of African descent. Haskell Wexler recognized that standard strong lighting used in filming tended produce too much glare on that kind of dark complexion and rendered the features indistinct. Accordingly, Wexler toned it down to feature Poitier with better photographic results.[2]In contrast to films like The Chase and Hurry Sundown, which offered confused visions of the South, In the Heat of the Night offered a tough, edgy vision of a Southern town that seemed to hate outsiders more than itself, a theme reflecting the uncertain mood of the time as the Civil Rights Movement attempted to take hold. On this count, the film became an overnight hit, especially with the talents of Sidney Poitier and Rod Steiger in place. During filming Poitier also contributed his efforts to Civil Rights functions devised by Dr. Martin Luther King.In a sneak preview in San Francisco, Norman Jewison was concerned when the young audience was laughing with the film as if it were a comedy. However, his editor, Hal Ashby, was convinced that they were appreciating the film with the amused satisfaction of a strong African American hero putting white bigots in their place. The audience's stunned reaction to the famous slapping scene convinced Jewison that the film was effective as drama.[3] That scene helped make the film so popular for audiences, finally seeing the top black film actor physically strike back against bigotry, that the film earned the nickname, Super-Spade Versus the Rednecks[4] During the film's initial run, Steiger and Poitier occasionally went to the Capitol Theatre in New York to amuse themselves seeing how many African American and white audience members there were, which could be immediately ascertained by listening to the former cheering Tibbs' retaliatory slap and the latter whispering "Oh!" in astonishment.[5]Then-freshman critic Roger Ebert gave In the Heat of the Night a positive review and placed it at number ten on his top ten list of films that year. AD Murphy of Variety magazine felt it was a good, but uneven film.[6] Another driving force was Canadian director Norman Jewison; through this film, he wanted to tell a story of a white man and a black man working together in spite of tough ongoings. He also hated the way black Americans were treated by the white establishment at the time. Jewison, Poitier and Steiger worked together and got along well during the filming, but Jewison had problems with the Southern authorities, and Poitier refused to come south of the MasonDixon Line for filming. Jewison therefore decided to film part of the film in Dyersburg (Edicott's house) and Union City, Tennessee, while the rest was filmed in Sparta, Chester (Harvey Oberst chase scene), and Freeburg (Compton's diner), Illinois: it worked out for everyone. It proved a conviction Jewison has held for a long time: he said on making film, "It's you against the world. It's like going to war. Everybody is trying to tell you something different and they are always putting obstacles in your way".The film, as of March, 2012, holds a 96% "Fresh" rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes, out of 28 reviews.[7]In the Heat of the Night was nominated for seven Academy Awards, winning five. They are as follows:[8]Other wins and nominations are:American Film Institute recognitionAugust 2, 1967(1967-08-02)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception5 Release on DVD & HD6 Awards and honors

6.1 Academy Award wins
6.2 Academy Award nominations
6.3 Other awards
6.4 Other nominations

6.1 Academy Award wins6.2 Academy Award nominations6.3 Other awards6.4 Other nominations7 References8 External links6.1 Academy Award wins6.2 Academy Award nominations6.3 Other awards6.4 Other nominationsSidney Poitier as Detective Virgil TibbsRod Steiger as Police Chief Bill GillespieWarren Oates as Sergeant (Patrolman) Sam WoodLee Grant as Mrs. Leslie ColbertLarry Gates as Eric EndicottJames Patterson as Lloyd Purdy (Delores' brother)William Schallert as Mayor Webb SchubertBeah Richards as Mama Caleba (aka Mrs. Bellamy)Peter Whitney as CPL. George CourtneyKermit Murdock as H.E. Henderson (banker)Larry D. Mann as WatkinsQuentin Dean as Delores PurdyAnthony James as Ralph Henshaw (diner counterman)Arthur Malet as Ted Ulam (mortician)Scott Wilson as Harvey Oberst (murder suspect)Matt Clark as Packy HarrisonEldon Quick as Charlie Hawthorne (photographer)Jester Hairston as Henry (Endicott's butler)In 2001 it was released on DVD.In 2010 it was digitized in High Definition (1080i) and broadcast on MGM HD.Academy Award for Best PictureAcademy Award for Best Actor  Rod SteigerAcademy Award for Film Editing  Hal AshbyAcademy Award for Best Sound  Samuel Goldwyn StudiosAcademy Award for Writing Adapted Screenplay  Stirling SilliphantAcademy Award for Directing - Norman JewisonAcademy Award for Sound Editing - James RichardGolden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture - DramaGolden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Drama - Rod SteigerGolden Globe Award for Best Screenplay - Stirling SilliphantBAFTA Award for Best Foreign Actor - Rod SteigerBAFTA UN Award - Norman JewisonEdgar Award - Best Motion Picture Screenplay - Stirling Silliphant (Ball's book also received an Edgar, for Best First Novel)New York Film Critics Circle Awards for Best PictureIn 2002, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #75AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains - #19 (Hero)AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"They call me Mister Tibbs!" - #16

"They call me Mister Tibbs!" - #16"They call me Mister Tibbs!" - #16BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Actor - Sidney PoitierBAFTA Award for Best Film from any Source - Norman JewisonDirectors Guild of America for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures - Norman JewisonGolden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture Director - Norman JewisonGolden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture Actor - Drama - Sidney PoitierGolden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress - Lee GrantGolden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress - Quentin DeanGrammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack Album for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media - Quincy JonesWriters Guild of America for Best Written American Drama - Stirling SilliphantDuBose, James (2008). Searching for Sparta. lulu.com.In the Heat of the Night at the Internet Movie DatabaseIn the Heat of the Night at Rotten TomatoesCharlie Chaplin
Flower Girl's theme by Jos Padilla (uncredited)[1]City Lights is a 1931 American romantic comedy film written by, directed by, and starring Charlie Chaplin. The story follows the misadventures of Chaplin's Tramp as he falls in love with a blind girl (Virginia Cherrill) and develops a friendship with a millionaire (Harry Myers). Although sound film were on the rise when Chaplin started developing the script in 1928, the director decided to continue working with silent productions. Filming started on December 1928, and only ended in 1930. City Lights was immediately popular upon release, with positive reviews and box office receipts of $5 million. Today, it is thought of as one of the highest accomplishments of Chaplin's prolific career. Although classified as a comedy, City Lights has an ending widely regarded as one of the most moving in cinema history.The officials of a city are dedicating a new statue, but when it is unveiled, Chaplin's Tramp is discovered sleeping on it. He is chased off by the crowd. Destitute and homeless he wanders the streets, getting tormented by two newsboys. He happens upon a blind Flower Girl (Virginia Cherrill), and buys a flower. Just when she is about to give him his change, a man gets into a nearby car and drives away, making her think the Tramp has driven off. The Tramp doesn't correct her and slinks away. The Flower Girl returns home to her simple life with her grandmother (Florence Lee).That evening, the Tramp runs into a drunken millionaire (Harry Myers) who is trying to commit suicide. The Tramp convinces him to live, whereupon the millionaire showers him with gifts. They return to the millionaire's mansion, where the Tramp gets a change of clothes, and then go out on the town, where the Tramp inadvertently causes much havoc. The next morning, they return to the mansion. The Flower Girl walks by, so the Tramp asks the millionaire for money and then buys all her flowers and drives her home in the millionaire's Rolls-Royce. She tells her grandmother about her wealthy suitor. When the Tramp returns to the mansion, the millionaire has sobered up and rudely dismisses him. But later that day, he meets the Tramp again while intoxicated, and invites him back for a wild party. The next morning, having sobered up again and planning to leave for a cruise, the millionaire once more tosses out the Tramp.Returning to the Flower Girl's apartment, the Tramp spies her being attended by a doctor. He decides to take a job to earn money for her, and becomes a street-sweeper, managing to annoy his new coworker. Meanwhile, the grandmother receives a notice that she and the Flower Girl will be evicted if they cannot pay their back rent, but hides it and goes out to beg. The Tramp visits the Flower Girl on his lunch break, and sees an ad for an operation that cures blindness. He then finds the notice and promises the Girl he will pay it. But he returns to work late and is fired. Dejected, he passes a boxing venue, where a fighter convinces him to spar with him, throw the fight, and they'll split the prize money. But the fighter turns out to be a fugitive from justice and flees, leaving the Tramp to fight a no-nonsense replacement. Despite a valiant effort, the Tramp is thrashed. He meets the drunken millionaire again, who takes him to the mansion and gives him $1000 for the Girl. But two burglars sneak in and clobber the millionaire, and when he comes to, he accuses the Tramp of stealing. The Tramp narrowly escapes the police, delivers the money to the Girl, and promises to return, but he is picked up by the police and thrown in jail.Several months later, the Little Tramp wanders the streets again, far more ragged than we have seen him before. Searching for the girl, he returns to her original street corner, but she is not there. With her sight restored, the girl has opened up a flower shop with her grandmother. When a rich man comes into the shop, the girl wonders if he is her mysterious benefactor. The Tramp, in ragged clothes and tormented by the same newsboys, suddenly finds himself staring at her through the window. She jokes to her colleague that she has "made a conquest". Seeing a flower that he has retrieved from the gutter falling apart in his hand, the girl kindly offers him a fresh flower from her shop, and a coin. The Tramp begins to leave, then reaches for the flower. The girl takes hold of his hand to place the coin in it and, recognizing the touch of his hand, she realizes who he is. "You?" she says, and he nods, asking, "You can see now?" She replies, "Yes, I can see now," and holds his hand to her heart. The Little Tramp smiles shyly at the girl, clutching the flower to his face, his eyes full of love and hope, as the film ends.Chaplin's feature The Circus, released in 1928, was his last film before the motion picture industry embraced sound recording and brought the silent movie era to a close. As his own producer and distributor (part owner of United Artists), Chaplin could still conceive City Lights as a silent film. Technically the film was a crossover, as its soundtrack had synchronized music, sound effects, and some unintelligible sounds that copied speech pattern films. The dialogue was presented on intertitles.[2] Chaplin was first contacted by inventor Eugene Augustin Lauste in 1918 about making a sound film, but never ended up meeting with Lauste.[3] Chaplin was dismissive about "talkies" and told a reporter that he'd "give the talkies three years, that's all."[4] He was also concerned about how to adjust the Little Tramp to sound films.[4]In early 1928 Chaplin began writing the script with Harry Carr. After the success of The Circus, Chaplin had originally wanted to make a film about a circus clown who goes blind and has to conceal his handicap from his young daughter by pretending that his inability to see were pratfalls. It also included sequences where two millionaires pick up the Little Tramp from the city dump and show him a good time in expensive clubs, and then drop him back off at the dump.[4] This film was intended to take place in Paris.[5]The plot of City Lights gradually grew from this initial concept. Chaplin first thought of the film's famous final scene where the newly cured blind girl sees the Little Tramp for the first time.[5] Chaplin wrote a highly detailed description of the scene and considered it to be the center of the entire film.[6] Chaplin officially began pre-production of the film in May 1928 and hired Austrian art director Henry Clive to design the sets that summer. Chaplin eventually cast Clive in the role of the millionaire. Although the film was originally set in Paris, the art direction is inspired by a mix of several cities. Robert Sherwood said that "it is a weird city, with confusing resemblances to London, Los Angeles, Naples, Paris, Tangiers and Council Bluffs. It is no city on earth and it is all cities."[7]On August 28, 1928 Chaplin's mother Hannah Chaplin died at the age of 63. Chaplin was distraught over his mother's death for several weeks and pre-production did not resume until mid-Fall 1928.[8] Psychologist Stephen Weissman has hypothesized that City Lights is highly autobiographical, with the blind girl representing Chaplin's mother while the drunken millionaire represents Chaplin's father.[9] Weissman also compared many of the film's sets with locations from Chaplin's real childhood such as the statue in the opening scene resembling St. Mark's Church on Kennington Park Road[10] and Chaplin referring to the waterfront set as the Thames Embarkment.[11]Chaplin had interviewed several actresses to play the blind flower girl but could not find an actress that he liked. He met Virginia Cherrill by chance at a boxing match at the Hollywood American Legion Stadium and immediately asked her to make a screen test. She was the first actress to subtly and convincingly act blind on camera due to her near-sightedness[12] and Cherrill signed a contract on November 1, 1928.[13]Filming for City Lights officially began on December 27, 1928, after Chaplin and Carr had worked on the script for almost an entire year.[13] As a filmmaker, Chaplin was known for being a perfectionist; he was notable for doing many more "takes" than other directors at the time.[14] Production began with the first scene at the flower stand where the Little Tramp first meets the Blind Flower Girl. The scene tooks weeks to shoot and Chaplin first began to have second thoughts about casting Cherrill. Years later Cherrill said "I never liked Charlie and he never liked me."[15] In his autobiography, Chaplin took responsibility for his on-set tensions with Cherrill, blaming the stress of making the film for the conflict.[15] Filming the scene continued until February 1929 and again for ten days in early April before Chaplin put the scene aside to be filmed at a later time.[16] He then shot the film's opening scene of the Little Tramp waking up in a newly unveiled public statue. This scene involved up to 380 extras and was especially stressful for Chaplin to shoot.[16] During this part of shooting, construction was being done at Chaplin Studios because the city of Los Angeles had decided to widen La Brea Avenue and Chaplin was forced to move several building away from the road.[17]Chaplin then shot the sequence where the Little Tramp first meets the millionaire and prevents him from committing suicide.[17] During filming Henry Clive suddenly decided that he did not want to jump into the tank of cold water in the scene, causing Chaplin to storm off set and fire Clive. He was quickly replaced by Harry Myers, who Chaplin had known while under contract at Keystone Studios. Chaplin finished shooting the sequence on July 29, 1929 with exteriors at Pasadena Bridge.[18] Chaplin then shot a sequence that was eventually cut from the film involving the Little Tramp attempting to retrieve a stick that was stuck in a wall. The scene included a young Charles Lederer and Chaplin later praised the scene but insisted that it needed to be cut.[19] Chaplin then continued filming the scenes with the millionaire until September 29, 1929.[20]In November Chaplin began working with Cherrill again in some of the Flower Girls less dramatic scenes. While waiting for her scenes for several months, Cherrill had become bored and opening complained to Chaplin. During the filming of one scene Cherrill asked Chaplin if she could leave early so that she could go to a hair appointment.[21] Chaplin fired Virginia Cherrill and replaced her with Georgia Hale, Chaplin's co-star in The Gold Rush.[14] However Hale's screen tests proved that she was unsuitable for the role.[22] Chaplin also briefly considered sixteen-year-old actress Violet Krauth, but was talked out of this idea by his collaborators.[23] Chaplin finally re-hired Cherrill to finish City Lights[22] and Cherrill demanded and got a raise to $75 per week.[23] Approximately seven minutes of test footage of Hale survives and is included on the DVD release; excerpts were first seen in the documentary Unknown Chaplin along with an unused opening sequence from the film.[14]Chaplin then cast Florence D. Lee as the Blind Girl's grandmother and shot scenes with Cherrill and Dee for five weeks.[23] In late 1929 Chaplin re-shot the first Flower Shop scene with Cherrill. This time the scene was completed in six days and Chaplin was happy with Cherrill's performance. Chaplin had been shooting the film for a year and was only a little more than half way finished.[24] From March to April 1930 Chaplin shot the scenes inside of the millionaire's house at the Town House on Wilshire Boulevard. He hired Joe Van Meter and Albert Austin, whom he had known since his days working for Fred Karno as the burglars.[25] In the late spring of 1930 Chaplin shot the last major comedy sequence in the film: the boxing match.[25] Chaplin hired Keystone actor Hank Mann to play the Tramp's opponent. The scene required 100 extras and Chaplin took fours days to rehearse and six days to shoot the scene.[26] In July and August Chaplin finished up six weeks of smaller scenes for the film, including the two scenes of the Tramp being harassed by newsboys, one of which was played by a young Robert Parrish.[26]In September 1930 Chaplin finished shooting the film with the final scene, which took six days to shoot.[26] Chaplin said that he was happy with Cherrill's performance in the scene and that she had eventually understood the role. When talking about his directing style on set, Chaplin stated that "everything I do is a dance. I think in terms of dance. I think more so in City Lights."[16]From October to December 1930 Chaplin edited the film and created the title cards.[27] When Chaplin completed the film, silent films had become generally unpopular. But City Lights was one of the great financial and artistic successes of Chaplin's career, and it was his personal favorite of his films. Especially fond of the final scene, he said, "[I]n City Lights just the last scene ... Im not acting .... Almost apologetic, standing outside myself and looking ... Its a beautiful scene, beautiful, and because it isnt over-acted."[14]The film score of City Lights was composed in six weeks with Arthur Johnston and included over one hundred musical cues,[28] several themes from popular melodies, and other melodies composed by Chaplin and Johnston.[1] The score was recorded in five days with Musical Arranger Alfred Newman.[29] Chaplin told a reporter that during the music's composition, "I really didn't write it down. I la-laed and Arthur Johnson wrote it down, and I wish you would give him credit because he did a very good job. It is all simple music, you know, in keeping with my character."[28]The main theme used as a leitmotif for the blind flower girl[30] is the song La Violetera (Wholl buy my Violets)[31] from Spanish composer Jos Padilla.[1] Chaplin unsuccessfully tried to secure the original song performer Raquel Meller in the lead role, but used her song anyway as a major theme.[32][33] Chaplin lost a lawsuit to Padilla (which took place in Paris, where Padilla lived) for not crediting him.[34][35] Some modern editions released for video include a new recording by Carl Davis.[36]As in other Chaplin movies, each scene has an element of slapstick in it, using the comic scenes in a symbolic way. The opening scene uses funny sounds to depict the important mayor and his wife who are smiling and talking emphatically before the crowd. The revelation of the monument before the acting crowd is actually the revelation of the tramp, the well-known Charlie Chaplin, before the movie-going crowd. Slapstick is also used to show how the Tramp unknowingly insults and sometimes openly attacks various institutions and people, from mocking the mayor and police to bashing the stuck-up butler or the snoopy neighbor.The Tramp in every scene barely escapes disaster of which he is completely unaware.[1] Via the comic scenes, the Tramp is shown to be short, dirty and sloppy. His life is contrasted with good food, clean clothing, a large house, and comfortable and clean chairs, couches and beds. He is shown to be fearful of looking at or even dreaming of a better life. In each encounter with the blind girl, she unknowingly manages to bash the Tramp, throwing water in his face, dropping a flower pot on his head etc. He also shows the hardships and many times unbearable conditions of the lower class via comedy, when the Tramp chooses to sweep the streets or sets himself up in the boxing ring. In the final scene, he happens to look in to the flower store, in a clear analogy to part of the opening scene where he peers at the nude figurine in the window of a dress shop.A major theme in City Lights is the contrast of material and spiritual wealth, translating life in the Great Depression. The millionaire is rich, but shallow and carefree, spending his money to escape from the real world and his empty lifestyle through heavy drinking. The blind girl is poor while rich in soul, with any income representing hope to overcome the struggles in her life. When the Tramp befriends the millionaire and gains some luxuries, he still does not forget his earlier life, as represented in the scene where the Tramp chases after a discarded cigarette in a sportscar.[37]After an unsuccessful preview at the Tower theater in Los Angeles,[29] City Lights premiered on January 30, 1931 at the Los Angeles Theater on Broadway in downtown LA. Albert Einstein and his wife were the guests of honor and the film received a standing ovation.[38] It next premiered at the George M. Cohan Theater in New York,[39] and at the Dominion in London in February.[40]Chaplin was nervous about reception of the film because by this time, silent films were becoming obsolete; Hollywood switched to sound films by the end of 1929. The film was enthusiastically received by Depression-era audiences, earning $5 million during its initial release,[41] and became one of Chaplin's most financially successful and critically acclaimed works. A film critic for the Los Angeles Examiner said that "not since I reviewed the first Chaplin comedies way back in the two-reel days has Charlie given us such an orgy of laughs."[29] The New York Times reviewer Mordaunt Hall considered it "a film worked out with admirable artistry".[42] On the other hand, Alexander Bakshy of The Nation was highly critical of City Lights, objecting against the silent format and over-sentimentality and describing it as "Chaplin's feeblest".[43]The popularity of City Lights endured, with the film's re-release in 1950 again having positive reception by audiences and critics.[44] In 1949, the critic James Agee wrote in Life magazine, that the final scene was the "greatest single piece of acting ever committed to celluloid."[45] Richard Meryman called the final scene one of the greatest moments in film history.[27] Charles Silver, Curator of Film at the Museum of Modern Art, states that the film is so highly regarded because it brought forth a new level of lyrical romanticism that did not appear in Chaplin's earlier works. He adds that like all romanticism, it is based in the denial of the real world around it. When the film premiered, Chaplin was much older, he was in the midst of another round of legal battles with former spouse Lita Grey and the economic and political climate of the world had changed. Chaplin uses The Girl's blindness to remind The Tramp of precarious nature of Romanticism in the real world as she unknowingly assaults him multiple times.[46] Film.com critic Eric D. Snider says that by 1931, most Hollywood filmmakers either embraced talking pictures, resigned themselves to their inevitability or just gave up making movies, yet Chaplin held firm with his vision in this project. He also notes that few in Hollywood had the clout to make a silent film at that late date, let alone do it well. One reason was that Chaplin knew The Tramp could not be adapted to talking movies and still work.[45]Several well-known directors have praised City Lights. Orson Welles said it was his favorite film. In a 1963 interview in the American magazine Cinema, Stanley Kubrick rated City Lights as fifth among his top ten films.[47] In 1972, the renowned Russian director Andrei Tarkovsky placed City Lights as fifth among this top ten and said of Chaplin, "He is the only person to have gone down into cinematic history without any shadow of a doubt. The films he left behind can never grow old."[48] George Bernard Shaw called Chaplin "the only genius to come out of the movie industry".[49] Celebrated Italian director Federico Fellini often praised this film and his Nights of Cabiria refers to it. In the 2003 documentary Charlie: The Life and Art of Charles Chaplin, Woody Allen said it was Chaplin's best picture. Allen is said to have based the final scene of his 1979 film Manhattan on the final scene of City Lights.[45] The film has also been studied and written about by American and international film critics and scholars. For example, French experimental musician and film critic Michel Chion has written an analysis of City Lights, published as Les Lumires de la ville.[50] Slavoj iek used the film as a primary example in his essay, "Why Does a Letter Always Arrive at Its Destination?".[51]In 1952, Sight and Sound magazine issued the results of its first poll for "The Best Films of All Time" and City Lights was voted #2, after Vittorio DeSica's Bicycle Thieves.[52] In 2002, City Lights ranked 45th on the critics' list.[53] That same year, directors were polled separately and ranked the film as 19th overall.[54] In 1992, the Library of Congress selected City Lights for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."[55] In 1997, the American Film Institute's tenth anniversary edition of 100 Years... 100 Movies ranked City Lights as the eleventh greatest American film of all time, an improvement over the 76th position on the original list.[56] AFI also chose the film as the best romantic comedy of American cinema in 2008's "10 Top 10".[57] The Tramp was number 38 on AFI's list of the 50 Best Heroes,[58] and the film ranked at 38th among the funniest films,[59] 10th among the greatest love stories,[60] and 33rd on the most inspiring films.[61]January 30, 1931(1931-01-30)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Pre-production
3.2 Production
3.3 Music
3.4 Themes

3.1 Pre-production3.2 Production3.3 Music3.4 Themes4 Reception and Legacy

4.1 Accolades

4.1 Accolades5 See also6 References7 External links3.1 Pre-production3.2 Production3.3 Music3.4 Themes4.1 AccoladesCharlie Chaplin as A TrampVirginia Cherrill as A Blind GirlFlorence Lee as The Blind Girl's GrandmotherHarry Myers as An Eccentric MillionaireAl Ernest Garcia as His Butler (as James)Hank Mann as A PrizefighterRobert Parrish as NewsboyHenry Bergman as Mayor and Man in BasementAlbert Austin as Street SweeperJean Harlow Uncredited ExtraList of United States comedy filmsOfficial websiteCity Lights at the Internet Movie DatabaseCity Lights at Rotten TomatoesCity Lights at the TCM Movie DatabaseCity Lights at AllRoviCity Lights, Clown MinistryAmerican Graffiti is a 1973 coming of age drama comedy film co-written/directed by George Lucas starring Richard Dreyfuss, Ron Howard, Paul Le Mat, Harrison Ford, Charles Martin Smith, Cindy Williams, Candy Clark, Mackenzie Phillips and Wolfman Jack. Set in 1962 Modesto, California, American Graffiti is a study of the cruising and rock and roll cultures popular among the postWorld War II baby boom generation. The film is a nostalgic portrait of teenage life in the early 1960s told in a series of vignettes, featuring the story of a group of teenagers and their adventures within one night.The genesis of American Graffiti was in Lucas's own teenage years in early 1960s Modesto. He was unsuccessful in pitching the concept to financiers and distributors but finally found favor at Universal Pictures after United Artists, 20th Century Fox, Columbia Pictures, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and Paramount Pictures turned him down. Filming was initially set to take place in San Rafael, California, but the production crew was denied permission to shoot beyond a second day. As a result, most filming for American Graffiti was done in Petaluma.American Graffiti was released to universal critical acclaim and financial success, and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. Produced on a $775,000 budget, the film has turned out to be one of the most profitable movies of all time. Since its initial release, American Graffiti has garnered an estimated return of well over $200 million in box office gross and home video sales, not including merchandising. In 1995, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.In the late summer of 1962, recent high school graduates and longtime friends Curt Henderson and Steve Bolander meet John Milner and Terry "The Toad" Fields at the local Mel's Drive-In parking lot. Despite receiving a $2,000 scholarship from the local Moose lodge, Curt is undecided if he wants to leave the next morning with Steve to go to the Northeastern United States to begin college. Steve lets Toad borrow his 1958 Chevy Impala for the evening and while he will be away at college. Steve's girlfriend Laurie, who is also Curt's younger sister, is unsure of Steve leaving, to which he suggests they see other people while he is away to "strengthen" their relationship.Curt, Steve and Laurie go to the local sock hop, while Toad and Milner begin cruising. En route to the hop, Curt sees a beautiful blonde girl in a white 1956 Ford Thunderbird. She mouths "I love you" before disappearing down the street. After leaving the hop, Curt is desperate to find the mysterious blonde, but is coerced by a group of greasers ("The Pharaohs") through an initiation rite that involves hooking a chain to a police car and successfully ripping out its back axle. Curt is told rumors that The Blonde is either a trophy wife or prostitute, which he immediately refuses to accept.Steve and Laurie break up following a series of arguments, and Milner inadvertently picks up Carol, an annoying teenybopper who seems fond of him. Toad, who is normally socially inept with girls, meets a flirtatious and somewhat rebellious girl named Debbie. Meanwhile, Curt learns that DJ Wolfman Jack broadcasts from just outside of Modesto, and inside the dark, eerie radio station, Curt encounters a bearded man he assumes to be the manager. Curt hands the man a message for The Blonde to call him or meet him. As he walks away, Curt hears the voice of The Wolfman and, seeing him broadcasting, realizes he had been speaking with him.The other story lines intertwine until Toad and Steve end up on "Paradise Road" to watch Milner race against the handsome but arrogant Bob Falfa, with Laurie as Falfa's passenger. Within seconds Falfa loses control of his car after blowing a front tire, plunges into a ditch and rolls his car. Steve and Milner run to the wreck, and a dazed Bob and Laurie stagger out of the car before it explodes. Distraught, Laurie grips Steve tightly and tells him not to leave her. He assures her that he has decided not to leave Modesto after all. The next morning, Curt is awakened by the sound of a phone ringing in a telephone booth, which turns out to be The Blonde. She tells him she might see him cruising tonight, but Curt replies that is not possible, because he will be leaving. At the airfield, he says goodbye to his parents, his sister and friends. As the plane takes off, Curt, gazing out of the window, sees the white Ford Thunderbird belonging to the mysterious Blonde.Prior to the end credits, an on-screen epilogue reveals that John was killed by a drunk driver in December 1964, Terry was reported missing in action near An Lc in December 1965, Steve is an insurance agent in Modesto, California, and Curt is a writer living in Canada.During the production of THX 1138 (1971), producer Francis Ford Coppola challenged co-writer/director George Lucas to write a script that would appeal to mainstream audiences.[2] Lucas embraced the idea, using his early 1960s teenage experiences cruising in Modesto, California. "Cruising was gone, and I felt compelled to document the whole experience and what my generation used as a way of meeting girls," Lucas explained.[2] As he developed the story in his mind, Lucas included his fascination with Wolfman Jack. Lucas had considered doing a documentary about The Wolfman when he attended the USC School of Cinematic Arts, but dropped the idea.[3]Adding in semi-autobiographical connotations, Lucas set the story in 1962 Modesto.[2] The characters Curt Henderson, John Milner and Terry "The Toad" Fields also represent different stages from his younger life. Curt is modeled after Lucas's personality during USC, while Milner is based on Lucas's teenage street racing and junior college years, and hot rod enthusiasts he had known from the Kustom Kulture in Modesto. Toad represents Lucas's nerd years as a freshman in high school, specifically his "bad luck" with dating.[4] The filmmaker was also inspired by Federico Fellini's I Vitelloni (1953).[5]After the financial failure of THX 1138, Lucas wanted the film to act as a release for a world-weary audience:[6]"[THX] was about real things that were going on and the problems we're faced with. I realized after making THX that those problems are so real that most of us have to face those things every day, so we're in a constant state of frustration. That just makes us more depressed than we were before. So I made a film where, essentially, we can get rid of some of those frustrations, the feeling that everything seems futile."[6]After Warner Bros. abandoned Lucas's early version of Apocalypse Now (1979) (during the post-production of THX 1138), the filmmaker decided to continue development on Another Quiet Night in Modesto, which he eventually changed to American Graffiti.[3] To co-write a fifteen-page film treatment, Lucas hired Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz, who also added semi-autobiographical connotations to the storyline.[7] In attempting to use the treatment to attract financing, Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz began pitching American Graffiti to various Hollywood studios and production companies,[2] but they were unsuccessful. Financiers believed music licensing issues would distract the film's budget. Alongside Easy Rider (1969), American Graffiti represents one of the first films to avoid a traditional film score approach and successfully rely on scenes specifically synchronized to an assortment of songs.[8]THX 1138 was released in March 1971[2] and Lucas was offered opportunities to direct Lady Ice (1973), Tommy (1975) or Hair (1979). He turned down the offers, determined to pursue his own projects, despite his desperation to find another film to direct.[9][10] During this time, Lucas conceived the idea for an untitled space opera, which would later become the basis for his Star Wars franchise. At the May 1971 Cannes Film Festival, THX was chosen for the Directors' Fortnight competition. There, Lucas met David Picker, then president of United Artists, who was intrigued by American Graffiti and Lucas's as-yet-untitled space opera. Picker decided to give Lucas $10,000 to develop Graffiti as a screenplay.[9]Lucas intended to spend another five weeks in Europe and hoped that Huyck and Katz would have a screenplay by the time he returned, but they were about to start on their own film, Messiah of Evil (1972),[7] so Lucas hired Richard Walter, a colleague from the USC School of Cinematic Arts. Walter was flattered, but instead tried to pitch Lucas a screenplay called Barry and the Persuasions, a story of East Coast teenagers in the late 1950s. Lucas held firm - his was a story about West Coast teenagers in the early 1960s. Walter was paid the $10,000, and he began to adapt the Lucas/Huyck/Katz treatment into a screenplay.[9]Lucas was dismayed when he returned to America in June 1971 and read Walter's script, which was written in the style and tone of an exploitation film, similar to 1967's Hot Rods to Hell. "It was overtly sexual and very fantasy-like, with playing chicken and things that kids didn't really do," Lucas reasoned. "I wanted something that was more like the way I grew up."[11] Walter's script also had Steve and Laurie going to Nevada to get married without their parents' permission.[5] He redrafted the screenplay, but Lucas fired Walter over creative differences.[9]After paying Walter, Lucas had exhausted his development fund with United Artists. He began writing the script, completing his first draft in just three weeks. Drawing upon his large collection of vintage records, Lucas wrote every scene with a musical backdrop in mind.[9] The cost of licensing the 75 songs Lucas wanted was a contributing factor in United Artists' ultimate rejection of the script, which the studio also felt was too experimental - "a musical montage with no characters." United Artists also passed on Star Wars, which Lucas shelved for the time being.[10]Lucas spent the rest of 1971 and early 1972 trying to raise financing for the American Graffiti script.[10] During this time, 20th Century Fox, Columbia Pictures, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer and Paramount Pictures all turned down the opportunity to co-finance and distribute the film.[12] Lucas, Huyck and Katz rewrote the second draft together, which, in addition to Modesto, was also set in Mill Valley and Los Angeles. Lucas also intended to end American Graffiti showing a title card detailing the fate of the characters, including the death of Milner and the disappearance of Toad in Vietnam. Huyck and Katz found the ending depressing and were incredulous that Lucas planned to include only the male characters. Lucas argued that mentioning the girls meant adding another title card, which he felt would prolong the ending. Because of this, Pauline Kael later accused Lucas of chauvinism.[12]Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz took the script to American International Pictures, who expressed interest, but ultimately believed American Graffiti was not violent or sexual enough for the studio's standards.[13] Lucas and Kurtz eventually found favor at Universal Pictures, who allowed Lucas total artistic control and the right of final cut privilege on the condition that he make American Graffiti on a strict, low budget.[10] This forced Lucas to drop the opening scene, in which the Blonde Angel, Curt's image of the perfect woman, drives through an empty drive-in cinema in her Ford Thunderbird, her transparency revealing she does not exist.[14]Universal initially projected a $600,000 budget, but added an additional $175,000 once producer Francis Ford Coppola signed on. This would allow the studio to advertise American Graffiti as "from the Man who Gave you The Godfather (1972)." However, Lucas was forced to concede final cut privilege. The proposition also gave Universal first look deals on Lucas's next two planned projects, Star Wars (1977) and Radioland Murders (1994).[13] As he continued to work on the script, Lucas encountered difficulties on the Steve and Laurie storyline. Lucas, Katz and Huyck worked on the third draft together, specifically on the scenes featuring Steve and Laurie.[15]Production proceeded with virtually no input or interference from Universal. American Graffiti was a low-budget film, and executive Ned Tanen had only modest expectations of its commercial success. However, Universal did object to the film's title, not knowing what "American Graffiti" meant;[15] Lucas was dismayed when some executives assumed he was making an Italian movie about feet.[12] The studio therefore submitted a long list of over 60 alternative titles, with their favorite being Another Slow Night in Modesto[15] and Coppola's Rock Around the Block.[12] They pushed hard to get Lucas to adopt any of the titles, but he was displeased with all the alternatives and persuaded Tanen to keep American Graffiti.[15]The film's lengthy casting process was overseen by Fred Roos, who worked with producer Francis Ford Coppola on The Godfather.[7] Because American Graffiti's main cast was associated with younger actors, the casting call and notices went through numerous high school drama groups and community theaters in the San Francisco Bay Area.[4] Among the actors was Mark Hamill, the future Luke Skywalker in Lucas' Star Wars trilogy.[14]Over 100 unknown actors auditioned for Curt Henderson before Richard Dreyfuss was cast. George Lucas was impressed with Dreyfuss' thoughtful analysis of the role,[4] and, as a result, offered the actor his choice of Curt or Terry "The Toad" Fields.[14] Roos, a former casting director on The Andy Griffith Show, suggested Ron Howard for Steve Bolander. Howard reluctantly accepted the part in attempting to avoid his typecasting as a child actor.[4] Bob Balaban turned down The Toad out of fear of typecasting, a decision which he later regretted. Charles Martin Smith, who, in his first year as a professional actor, had already appeared in two feature films including 20th Century Fox's The Culpepper Cattle Co., and 4 TV episodes, was eventually cast in the role.[16]Although Cindy Williams was cast as Laurie Henderson, the actress hoped she would get the part of Debbie Dunham, which ended up going to Candy Clark.[7] Mackenzie Phillips, who portrays Carol, was only 12 years old, and under California law, producer Gary Kurtz had to become her legal guardian for the duration of filming.[14] As Bob Falfa, Roos cast Harrison Ford, who was then concentrating on a carpentry career. Ford agreed to take the role on the condition that he would not have to cut his hair. The character has a flattop haircut in the script, but a compromise was eventually reached whereby Ford wore a stetson to cover his hair. Producer Francis Ford Coppola encouraged Lucas to cast Wolfman Jack as himself in a cameo appearance. "George Lucas and I went through thousands of Wolfman Jack phone calls that were taped with the public," Jack reflected. "The telephone calls [heard on the broadcasts] in the motion picture and on the soundtrack were actual calls with real people."[15]Charles Martin Smith (18) and Ron Howard (18) were the only two real teenage principal actors of the film. Most of the remaining principal cast members were in their 20s with the exceptions of the 12 year old Mackenzie Phillips, and Harrison Ford, who turned 30 during filming.Although American Graffiti is set in 1962 Modesto, California, Lucas believed the city had changed too much in 10 years and initially chose San Rafael as the primary shooting location.[14] Filming began on June 26, 1972. However, Lucas soon became frustrated at the time it was taking to fix camera mounts to the cars.[17] A key member of the production had also been arrested for growing marijuana,[12] and, in addition to already running behind the shooting schedule, the San Rafael City Council immediately became concerned about the disruption that filming caused for local businesses and therefore withdrew permission to shoot beyond a second day.[17]Petaluma, a similarly small town approximately 20 miles north of San Rafael, became more cooperative and American Graffiti moved there without the loss of a single day of shooting. Lucas convinced the San Rafael City Council to allow two further nights of filming for general cruising shots, which he used to evoke as much of the intended location as possible in the finished film. Shooting in Petaluma began on June 28 and proceeded at a quick pace.[17] Lucas mimicked the filmmaking style of B movie producer Sam Katzman in attempting to save money and authenticated low budget filming methods.[14]In addition to Petaluma, other locations included Van Ness Avenue in San Francisco, Sonoma, Richmond, Novato, and the Buchanan Field Airport in Concord.[18] The 'freshman hop' dance was filmed in the 'Boys Gymnasium' at Tamalpais High School in Mill Valley.[19]More problems ensued during filming: Paul Le Mat was sent to the hospital after an allergic reaction to walnuts. Le Mat, Harrison Ford and Bo Hopkins were often drunk between takes, and had conducted climbing competitions to the top of the local Holiday Inn sign. One actor set fire to Lucas' motel room. Another night, Le Mat threw Richard Dreyfuss into a swimming pool, gashing Dreyfuss' forehead on the day before he was due to have his close-ups filmed. Dreyfuss also complained over the wardrobe that Lucas had chosen for the character. Ford was arrested one night while in a bar fight and kicked out of his motel room. In addition, two camera operators were nearly killed when filming the climactic race scene on Frates Road outside Petaluma.[20] Principal photography ended on August 4, 1972.[18]The final scenes in film, shot at Buchanan Field, feature a Douglas DC-7C airliner of Magic Carpet Airlines which had previously been leased from owner Club America Incorporated by the rock band Grand Funk Railroad from March 1971 to June 1971.[21][19][22]Lucas considered covering duties as the sole cinematographer, but dropped the idea.[14] Instead, he elected to shoot American Graffiti using two cinematographers (as he had done in THX 1138) and no formal director of photography. Two cameras were used simultaneously in scenes involving conversations between actors in different cars, which resulted in significant production time savings.[17] After CinemaScope proved to be too expensive,[14] Lucas decided that American Graffiti should have a documentary-like feel, and shot the film using Techniscope cameras. He believed that Techniscope, an inexpensive way of shooting in 35 mm film and utilizing only half of the film's frame, would give a perfect widescreen format resembling 16 mm. Adding to the documentary feel was Lucas's openness for the cast to improvise scenes. He also used goofs for the final cut, notably Charles Martin Smith's (Toad) arriving on his scooter to meet Steve outside Mel's Drive-In.[23] Jan D'Alquen and Ron Eveslage were hired as the cinematographers, but filming with Techniscope cameras brought lighting problems. As a result, Lucas commissioned help from friend Haskell Wexler, who was credited as the "visual consultant".[17]Lucas wanted to have wife Marcia edit American Graffiti, but Universal executive Ned Tanen insisted on Verna Fields, who had just finished Steven Spielberg's The Sugarland Express (1974).[20] Fields worked on the first rough cut of the film before she left to resume work on What's Up, Doc? (1972). Following Fields's departure, Lucas struggled with editing the film's story structure. He had written the script so that the four (Curt, Steve, John and Toad) storylines were always presented in the same sequence. The first cut of American Graffiti was three-and-a-half hours long; and, in removing an hour and a half, numerous scenes were cut and many others were shortened and combined. The film became increasingly loose, with the result that the presentations of scenes no longer resembled Lucas's original "ABCD structure."[23] At 112 minutes, Lucas completed his final cut of American Graffiti in December 1972.[24] Walter Murch assisted Lucas in post-production for audio mixing and sound design purposes.[23] Murch suggested making Wolfman Jack's radio show the "backbone" of the film. "The Wolfman was an ethereal presence in the lives of young people," said producer Gary Kurtz, "and it was that quality we wanted and obtained in the picture."[20]Lucas's choice of background music was crucial to the mood of each scene, but he was realistic about the complexities of copyright clearances and suggested a number of alternative tracks. Universal wanted Lucas and producer Gary Kurtz to hire an orchestra for sound-alikes. The studio eventually proposed a flat deal that offered every music publisher the same amount of money. This was acceptable to most of the companies representing Lucas's first choices, but not to RCA - with the consequence that Elvis Presley is conspicuous by his absence from the soundtrack.[10] Clearing the music licensing rights had cost approximately $90,000,[20] and as a result there was no money left for a traditional film score. "I used the absence of music, and sound effects, to create the drama," Lucas later explained.[24]A soundtrack album for the film, 41 Original Hits from the Soundtrack of American Graffiti, was issued by MCA Records. The album contains all the songs used in the film (with the exception of "Gee" by the Crows, which was subsequently included on a second soundtrack album), presented in the order in which they appeared in the film.Despite unanimous positive praise at a January 1973 test screening, which was attended by Universal executive Ned Tanen, the studio threatened to re-edit American Graffiti from George Lucas's original cut.[24] There was conflict between Lucas and producer Coppola on one side, and Tanen and Universal on the other, during which Coppola offered to literally "buy the film" from the studio, insisting he was prepared to reimburse Universal's $775,000 budget.[18] 20th Century Fox and Paramount Pictures also gave similar offers to the studio.[3] The conflicts between Lucas and Universal only led to the studio threatening to have William Hornbeck completely re-edit American Graffiti.[25]When Coppola's The Godfather (1972) won the Academy Award for Best Picture in March 1973, Universal decided to cut only three scenes (about four minutes) from Lucas's cut. This included Toad's encounter with a fast-talking car salesman, an argument between Steve and his former teacher Mr. Kroot at the sock hop, and Bob Falfa's effort to serenade Laurie with "Some Enchanted Evening". However, Universal believed that American Graffiti, in its edited form, was only fit for release as a television movie.[18]Positive word of mouth came from various employees at Universal[18] and the studio dropped the TV movie idea and began securing theaters in Los Angeles and New York for a limited release.[8] However, Universal presidents Sidney Sheinberg and Lew Wasserman found out about the critical praise in LA and New York, and the marketing department rejuvenated their promotion strategy for American Graffiti,[8] by investing an additional $500,000 in marketing and promotion.[3] The film was released in the United States on August 1, 1973 to sleeper hit reception.[26] American Graffiti, which cost $1.27 million to produce/market, yielded a worldwide box office gross that topped $55 million.[27] Outside America, however, the film had only modest success, but acquired cult film recognition in France.[25]Universal reissued Graffiti in 1978 and earned an additional $63 million, totalling $118 million for the two releases.[3] The reissue included stereophonic sound,[27] and the additional four minutes that the studio had removed from Lucas's original cut. All home video releases also included these scenes.[18] At the end of its theatrical run, American Graffiti had one of the lowest cost-to-profit ratios of a motion picture ever.[3] Producer Francis Ford Coppola regretted having not financed the film himself. Lucas recalled, "He would have made $30 million on the deal. He never got over it and he still kicks himself."[25] It was the thirteenth-highest grossing film of all time in 1977,[26] and, adjusted for inflation, is currently the forty-third highest.[28] By the 1990s, American Graffiti had earned more than $200 million in box office gross and home video sales.[3] In December 1997 Variety reported that the film had earned an additional $55.13 million in rental revenue.[29]Universal Studios Home Entertainment first released the film on DVD in September 1998,[30] and once more as a double feature with More American Graffiti (1979) in January 2004.[31]Aside from the four minutes originally deleted from Lucas' original cut retained, the only major change in the DVD version is the main title sequence, particularly the sky background to Mel's Drive-In, which was redone by ILM.Universal released the film on Blu-ray on May 31, 2011.[32][33]American Graffiti went on to receive universal critical acclaim. Based on 33 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes, 97% of the critics enjoyed the film with an average score of 8.3/10. The consensus reads: "One of the most influential of all teen films, American Graffiti is a funny, nostalgic, and bittersweet look at a group of recent high school grads' last days of innocence."[34] Roger Ebert praised the film for being "not only a great movie but a brilliant work of historical fiction; no sociological treatise could duplicate the movie's success in remembering exactly how it was to be alive at that cultural instant."[35]Jay Cocks of Time magazine wrote that American Graffiti "reveals a new and welcome depth of feeling. Few films have shown quite so well the eagerness, the sadness, the ambitions and small defeats of a generation of young Americans."[36] A.D. Murphy from Variety felt American Graffiti was a vivid "recall of teenage attitudes and morals, told with outstanding empathy and compassion through an exceptionally talented cast of unknown actors."[37] Dave Kehr, writing in the Chicago Reader, called the film a brilliant work of popular art that redefined nostalgia as a marketable commodity, while establishing a new narrative style.[38]American Graffiti depicts multiple characters going through a coming of age, such as the decisions to attend college or reside in a small town.[7] The 1962 setting represents nearing an end of an era in American society and pop culture. The musical backdrop also links between the early years of rock and roll in the mid-late 1950s (i.e. Bill Haley & His Comets, Elvis Presley and Buddy Holly) and the early 1960s British Invasion, which Don McLean's "American Pie" and the 1972 revival of 1950s acts and oldies paralleled during the conception and filming. The setting is also before the outbreaks of the Vietnam War and the John F. Kennedy assassination[7] and before the peak years of the counterculture movement. American Graffiti evokes mankind's relationship with machines, notably the elaborate number of hot rods, and teenagers' obsession with radio, especially with the inclusion of Wolfman Jack and his mysterious and mythological faceless (to most) voice.American Graffiti was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture but lost to The Sting (1973). Further nominations at the 46th Academy Awards included Best Director (George Lucas), Best Original Screenplay (Lucas, Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz), Best Supporting Actress (Candy Clark) and Best Film Editing (Verna Fields and Marcia Lucas).[39] The film won Best Motion Picture (Musical or Comedy) at the 31st Golden Globe Awards, while Paul Le Mat won Most Promising Newcomer. Lucas was nominated for Best Director and Richard Dreyfuss was nominated for Best Actor in a Comedy or Musical.[40] More nominations included Cindy Williams by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts for Best Actress in a Supporting Role,[41] Lucas for the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing,[42] and Lucas, Huyck and Katz by the Writers Guild of America for Best Original Comedy.[25]Internet reviewer MaryAnn Johanson acknowledged that American Graffiti rekindled public and entertainment interest in the 1950s and 1960s and influenced other films such as The Lords of Flatbush (1974) and Cooley High (1975) and the TV series Happy Days.[43] Alongside other films from the New Hollywood era, American Graffiti is often cited for helping give birth to the summer blockbuster.[44] The film's box office success made George Lucas an instant millionaire. He gave an amount of the film's profits to Haskell Wexler for his visual consulting help during filming, and to Wolfman Jack for "inspiration". Lucas's net worth was now $4 million, and he set aside a $300,000 independent fund for his long cherished space opera project, which would eventually become the basis for Star Wars (1977).[18]The financial success of Graffiti also gave Lucas opportunities to establish more elaborate development for Lucasfilm, Skywalker Sound, and Industrial Light & Magic.[27] Based on the success of the 1977 reissue, Universal began production for the sequel More American Graffiti (1979).[3] Lucas and writers Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz later collaborated on Radioland Murders (1994), also released by Universal Pictures, for which Lucas acted as executive producer. The film features characters intended to be Curt and Laurie Henderson's parents, Roger and Penny Henderson.[27] In 1995 American Graffiti was deemed culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.[45] In 1997 the city of Modesto, California honored Lucas with a statue dedication of American Graffiti at George Lucas Plaza.[2]In 1998 the American Film Institute (AFI) ranked it as the seventy-seventh greatest film ever in the 100 Years... 100 Movies list. When the 10th Anniversary Edition came in June 2007, AFI moved American Graffiti to the sixty-second greatest film.[46] The movie was also listed as the forty-third funniest.[47] The song "Smoke Gets in Your Eyes" was nominated for AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs.[48] Director David Fincher credited American Graffiti as a visual influence for Fight Club (1999).[49] Lucas's Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones (2002) features references to the film. The yellow airspeeder that Anakin Skywalker and Obi-Wan Kenobi use to pursue the bounty hunter Zam Wesell is based on John Milner's yellow deuce coupe,[50] while Dex's Diner is reminiscent of Mel's Drive-In.[51] Adam Savage and Jamie Hyneman of MythBusters conducted the "rear axle" experiment on the January 11, 2004 episode.[52]Given the popularity of the film's cars with customizers and hot rodders in the years since its release, their fate immediately after the film is ironic. All were offered for sale in San Francisco newspaper ads; only the '58 Impala (driven by Ron Howard) attracted a buyer, selling for only a few hundred dollars. The yellow Deuce and the white T-bird went unsold, despite being priced as low as US$3,000.[53] The registration plate on Milner's yellow deuce coupe is THX138 on a yellow California license plate, slightly altered, reflecting Lucas's earlier science fiction film.August 11, 1973(1973-08-11)1 Plot2 Cast3 Development

3.1 Inspiration
3.2 United Artists
3.3 Universal Pictures

3.1 Inspiration3.2 United Artists3.3 Universal Pictures4 Production

4.1 Casting
4.2 Filming
4.3 Cinematography
4.4 Editing

4.1 Casting4.2 Filming4.3 Cinematography4.4 Editing5 Soundtrack6 Reception

6.1 Release
6.2 Critical analysis
6.3 Themes
6.4 Awards

6.1 Release6.2 Critical analysis6.3 Themes6.4 Awards7 Legacy8 References

8.1 Footnotes
8.2 Bibliography

8.1 Footnotes8.2 Bibliography9 External links3.1 Inspiration3.2 United Artists3.3 Universal Pictures4.1 Casting4.2 Filming4.3 Cinematography4.4 Editing6.1 Release6.2 Critical analysis6.3 Themes6.4 Awards8.1 Footnotes8.2 BibliographyRichard Dreyfuss as Curt HendersonRon Howard as Steve BolanderPaul Le Mat as John MilnerCharles Martin Smith as Terry "The Toad" FieldsCindy Williams as Laurie HendersonCandy Clark as Debbie DunhamMackenzie Phillips as Carol MorrisonHarrison Ford as Bob FalfaBo Hopkins as Joe YoungWolfman Jack as himself, an XERB Disc JockeyKathleen Quinlan as PegManuel Padilla, Jr. and Beau Gentry as Carlos and AntsJim Bohan as Officer HolsteinJana Bellan as BuddaFlash Cadillac & the Continental Kids as Herbie and the HeartbeatsDeby Celiz as WendySuzanne Somers as Blonde in T-BirdJohnny Weissmuller, Jr. as Badass 1Kay Lenz as JaneLynne Marie Stewart as Bobbie TuckerJohn Baxter (1999). Mythmaker: The Life and Work of George Lucas. New York City: Spike Books. ISBN0-380-97833-4.Marcus Hearn (2005). The Cinema of George Lucas. New York City: ABRAMS Books. ISBN0-8109-4968-7.Dale Pollock (1999). Skywalking: The Life and Films of George Lucas. New York City: Da Capo Press. ISBN0-306-80904-4.Official websiteAmerican Graffiti, internet radio stationAmerican Graffiti at the Internet Movie DatabaseAmerican Graffiti at AllRoviAmerican Graffiti Filmsite.orgThe City of Petaluma's Salute to American GraffitiKip Pullman's American Graffiti Blogwww.americangraffiti.jp Japanese Fan SiteAmerican Graffiti at Rotten TomatoesAmerican Graffiti at Box Office MojoStaff (1977-05-30). "Star Wars: The Year's Best Movie". Time. Archived from the original on 14 November 2010. http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,914964,00.html. Retrieved 2010-11-16.All the President's Men is a 1976 Academy Award-winning political thriller based on the 1974 non-fiction book of the same name by Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein, the two journalists investigating the Watergate scandal for The Washington Post. The film starred Robert Redford and Dustin Hoffman as Woodward and Bernstein, respectively; it was produced by Walter Coblenz, written by William Goldman, and directed by Alan J. Pakula.In June 1972, a security guard (Frank Wills, playing himself) at the Watergate complex finds a door kept unlocked with tape. The police arrive where they find and arrest five burglars in the Democratic National Committee headquarters within the complex. The next morning, The Washington Post assigns new reporter Bob Woodward (Robert Redford) to the local courthouse to cover the unimportant story.Woodward learns that the five men, four Cuban-Americans from Miami and James W. McCord, Jr., had bugging equipment and have their own "country club" attorney. McCord identifies himself in court as having recently left the Central Intelligence Agency and the others also have CIA ties. The reporter connects the burglars to E. Howard Hunt, a former employee of the CIA, and President Richard Nixon's Special Counsel Charles Colson.Carl Bernstein (Dustin Hoffman), another Post reporter, is assigned to cover the Watergate story with Woodward. The two are reluctant partners, but work well together. Executive editor Ben Bradlee (Jason Robards) believes their work is incomplete, however, and not worthy of the Post's front page. He encourages them to continue to gather information.Woodward contacts "Deep Throat" (Hal Holbrook), a senior government official and anonymous source he has used in the past. Communicating through copies of The New York Times and a balcony flowerpot, they meet in a parking garage in the middle of the night. Deep Throat speaks in riddles and metaphors about the Watergate break-in, but advises Woodward to "follow the money".Over the next few weeks, Woodward and Bernstein connect the five burglars to thousands of dollars in diverted campaign contributions to Nixon's Committee to Re-elect the President (CRP, or CREEP). Bradlee and others at the Post dislike the two young reporters' reliance on unnamed sources like Deep Throat, and wonder why the Nixon administration would break the law when the President is likely to defeat Democratic nominee George McGovern.Through former CREEP treasurer Hugh W. Sloan, Jr. (Stephen Collins), Woodward and Bernstein connect a slush fund of hundreds of thousands of dollars to White House Chief of Staff H. R. Haldeman"the second most important man in this country"and former Nixon Attorney General John N. Mitchell, now head of CREEP. They learn that CREEP used the fund to begin a "ratfucking" campaign to sabotage Democratic presidential candidates a year before the Watergate burglary, when Nixon was behind Edmund Muskie in the polls.Bradlee's demand for thoroughness forces the reporters to obtain other sources to confirm the Haldeman connection. When the White House issues a non-denial denial of the Post's above-the-fold story, the editor thus continues to support them.Woodward secretly meets with Deep Throat again for more questions where Deep Throat finally reveals that the Watergate break-in was indeed masterminded by Haldeman. Deep Throat also claims that the cover-up was not to hide the other burglaries or of their involvement with CREEP, but to hide the "covert operations" involving "the entire U.S. intelligence community", and warns that Woodward, Bernstein, and others' lives are in danger. When Woodward and Bernstein relay this to Bradlee, he urges the reporters to continue despite the risk and Nixon's re-election.In the final scene, set on January 20, 1973, Bernstein and Woodward type out the full story, with the TV in their office showing Nixon taking the Oath of Office, for his second term as President of the United States, in the foreground. The sound of their typewriter keys blends on the soundtrack with that of the 21-gun-salute at the inauguration, as if to suggest that Woodward and Bernstein are actively "gunning-down" Nixon at that very moment. A montage of Watergate-related teletype headlines from the following years is shown, ending with Nixon's resignation and the inauguration of Vice President Gerald Ford on August 9, 1974.Robert Redford bought the rights to Woodward and Bernstein's book in 1974 for $450,000 with the notion to adapt it into a film with a budget of $5 million.[2] Ben Bradlee realized that the film was going to be made regardless of whether he approved of it or not and felt that it made "more sense to try to influence it factually".[2] The executive editor of the Washington Post hoped that the film would have an important impact on people who harbored a negative stereotype of newspapers.Director Alan J. Pakula and Redford were not happy with screenwriter William Goldman's first draft.[2] Woodward and Bernstein also read it and did not like it. Redford asked for their suggestions but Bernstein and writer Nora Ephron wrote their own draft. Redford read and did not like it, saying, "a lot of it was sophomoric and way off the beat".[2] He and Pakula held all-day sessions working on the script. The director also spent hours interviewing editors and reporters, taking notes of their comments. Claims that Pakula and Redford rewrote the screenplay have been debunked, however, after an investigation into the matter by Richard Stayton in Written By magazine. Stayton compared several drafts of the script, including the final production draft, and concluded that Goldman was properly credited as the writer and that the final draft had "William Goldman's distinct signature on each page."[3]Dustin Hoffman and Redford visited the Post offices for months, sitting in on news conferences and conducting research for their roles.[2] The Post denied the production permission to shoot in its newsroom and so set designers took measurements of the newspaper's offices, photographed everything, and boxes of trash were gathered and transported to sets recreating the newsroom on two soundstages in Hollywood's Burbank Studios at a cost of $200,000. The filmmakers went to great lengths for accuracy and authenticity, including making replicas of phone books that were no longer in existence.[2] Nearly 200 desks at $500 apiece were purchased from the same firm that sold desks to the Post in 1971. The desks were also colored the same precise shade of paint. The production was supplied with a brick from the main lobby of the Post so that it could be duplicated in fiberglass for the set. Principal photography began on May 12, 1975 in Washington, D.C.[2]The billing followed the formula of James Stewart and John Wayne in John Ford's The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance (1962), with Redford billed over Hoffman in the posters and trailers and Hoffman billed above Redford in the film itself.Unlike the book, the film itself only covers the first seven months of the Watergate scandal, from the time of the break-in to Nixon's second inauguration on January 20, 1973.The film introduced the catchphrase Follow the money, which was absent from the book, or any documentation of Watergate.Sundance Productions, a company owned by Robert Redford, will release "All The Presidents Men" Revisited, a two-hour documentary that will be broadcast on Discovery Channel Worldwide.[4]According to Box Office Mojo, the film earned a "Domestic Total Gross" of $70,600,000.In 2007, it was added to the AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) list at #77. AFI also named it #34 on its America's Most Inspiring Movies list and #57 of the Top 100 Thrilling Movies. The characters of Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein shared the rank of #27 Hero on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains list. Entertainment Weekly ranked All the President's Men as one of the 25 "Powerful Political Thrillers".[7]In 2010, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".April 9, 1976(1976-04-09)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Differences from the book5 "All The Presidents Men" Revisited6 Accolades7 References8 External linksRobert Redford as Bob WoodwardDustin Hoffman as Carl BernsteinJason Robards as Ben BradleeJack Warden as Harry M. RosenfeldHal Holbrook as "Deep Throat"Jane Alexander as Judy HobackMartin Balsam as Howard SimonsMeredith Baxter as Debbie SloanNed Beatty as Martin DardisPolly Holliday as Dardis' secretaryStephen Collins as Hugh W. Sloan, Jr.Penny Fuller as Sally AikenRobert Walden as Donald SegrettiFrank Wills as HimselfF. Murray Abraham as Sgt. Paul LeeperDavid Arkin as Eugene BachinskiHenry Calvert as Bernard BarkerDominic Chianese as Eugenio MartnezRon Hale as Frank SturgisJames Karen as Hugh Sloan's lawyerBasil Hoffman as Assistant metro editorAll the President's Men at the Internet Movie DatabaseAll the President's Men at AllRoviAll the President's Men at Box Office MojoAll the President's Men at Rotten TomatoesWashington Post's retrospective articleTime magazine profileDirector Steven Soderbergh on the film for The New York TimesFrom the Watergate Break-in to a Broken News MediaRocky is a 1976 American sports drama film directed by John G. Avildsen and both written by and starring Sylvester Stallone. It tells the rags to riches American Dream story of Rocky Balboa, an uneducated but kind-hearted debt collector for a loan shark in the city of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Rocky starts out as a club fighter who later gets a shot at the world heavyweight championship. It also stars Talia Shire as Adrian, Burt Young as Adrian's brother Paulie, Burgess Meredith as Rocky's trainer Mickey Goldmill, and Carl Weathers as the champion, Apollo Creed.The film, made on a budget of $1.1 million[2][3] and shot in 28 days, was a sleeper hit; it made over $225 million[1] the highest grossing film of 1976, and won three Oscars, including Best Picture. The film received many positive reviews and turned Stallone into a major star.[4] It spawned five sequels: Rocky II, III, IV, V and Rocky Balboa.On November 25, 1975, Rocky Balboa (Sylvester Stallone) is introduced as a small-time boxer and collector for Anthony Gazzo (Joe Spinell), a loan shark, living in the Kensington neighborhood of Philadelphia. The World Heavyweight Championship bout is scheduled for New Year's Day 1976, the year of the United States Bicentennial. When the opponent of undefeated heavyweight champion Apollo Creed (Carl Weathers) is injured, Creed comes up with the idea of giving a local underdog a shot at the title and, because he likes Rocky's nickname "The Italian Stallion," he selects the relatively unknown fighter. He puts it in lights by proclaiming "Apollo Creed Meets The Italian Stallion." The fight promoter George Jergens (Thayer David) says the decision is "very American"; but Creed says, rather, that it is "very smart."To prepare for the fight Rocky trains with a 1920s-era ex-bantamweight fighter and gym owner, Mickey Goldmill (Burgess Meredith). Mickey always considered Rocky's potential to be better than his efforttelling him he had heart but also calling him a "tomato" and "leg breaker for some cheap second-rate loan shark" among other endearments, and putting Rocky out of his gym locker preceding the "freak luck" opportunity that comes Rocky's way, and Rocky is initially skeptical of Mickey's motives and timing for wanting to train Rocky for the big fight. Rocky's good friend Paulie (Burt Young), a meat-packing-plant worker, lets him practice his punches on the carcasses hanging in the freezers.A significant and prominent sub-plot has Rocky courting and eventually dating Paulie's shy, quiet, ostensibly librarian-like and potentially spinster sister, Adrian (Talia Shire), who works as a clerk in a local pet store. He draws Adrian out of her shell and, as Rocky's girlfriend, she begins to transform into a womanly, wifely figure. The night before the fight Rocky confides to Adrian that he does not expect to beat Creed, and that all he wants is to go the distance.On New Year's Day the climactic boxing match begins. Apollo Creed does not initially take the fight seriously, and Rocky unexpectedly knocks him down in the first round (no fighter had yet floored Creed during Creed's professional career), embarrassing Creed, and the match turns intense. The fight indeed lasts 15 rounds, with both fighters sustaining many injuries; Rocky suffers his first broken nose and debilitating trauma around the eye, and Creed sustains brutal blows to his ribs with substantial internal bleeding. As the match progresses, Creed's superior skill is countered by Rocky's apparently unlimited ability to absorb punishment, and his dogged refusal to be knocked out. As the final round bell sounds, with both fighters locked in each other's arms, an exhausted Creed vows "Ain't gonna be no re-match," to which an equally spent Rocky replies "Don't want one." After the fight, there is a din wherein multiple layers of drama are played out: sportscasters and audience are going wild; the promoter George Jergens announces over the loudspeaker that the match was "the greatest exhibition of boxing stamina in the history of the ring"; Rocky calls out repeatedly for Adrian, who runs down and comes into the ring as Paulie distracts the security personnel. As the ring announcer declares the fight for Apollo Creed by virtue of a split decision (8:7, 7:8, 9:6), Adrian and Rocky embrace while they profess their love to one another, not caring about the result of the fight.Boxer Joe Frazier has a cameo appearance in the film. The character of Apollo Creed was influenced by outspoken boxer Muhammad Ali who fought Frazier three times. During the Academy Awards ceremony, Ali and Stallone staged a brief comic confrontation to show Ali was not offended by the film. Some of the plot's most memorable momentsRocky's carcass-punching scenes and Rocky running up the steps of the Philadelphia Museum of Art, as part of his training regimeare taken from the real-life exploits of Joe Frazier, for which he received no credit.[6]Due to the film's low budget[citation needed], members of Stallone's family played minor roles. His father rings the bell to signal the start and end of a round, his brother Frank plays a street corner singer, and his first wife, Sasha, was stills photographer.[7] Other cameos include Los Angeles television sportscaster Stu Nahan playing himself, alongside radio and TV broadcaster Bill Baldwin and Lloyd Kaufman, founder of the independent film company Troma, appearing as a drunk. Longtime Detroit Channel 7 Action News anchor Diana Lewis has a small scene as a TV news reporter. Tony Burton appeared as Apollo Creed's trainer, Tony "Duke" Evers, a role he would reprise in the entire Rocky series, though he is not given an official name until Rocky II. Though uncredited, Michael Dorn made his acting debut as Creed's bodyguard.[8]United Artists liked Stallone's script, and viewed it as a possible vehicle for a well-established star such as Robert Redford, Ryan O'Neal, Burt Reynolds, or James Caan. Stallone appealed to the producers to be given a chance to star in the film. He later said that he would never have forgiven himself if the film became a success with someone else in the lead. He also knew that producers Irwin Winkler's and Robert Chartoff's contract with the studio enabled them to "greenlight" a project if the budget was kept low enough.Certain elements of the story were altered during filming. The original script had a darker tone: Mickey was portrayed as racist and the script ended with Rocky throwing the fight after realizing he did not want to be part of the professional boxing world after all.[9]Although Chartoff and Winkler were enthusiastic about the script and the idea of Stallone playing the lead character, they were hesitant about having an unknown headline the film. The producers also had trouble casting other major characters in the story, with Adrian and Apollo Creed cast unusually late by production standards (both were ultimately cast on the same day). Real-life boxer Ken Norton was initially sought for the role of Apollo Creed, but he pulled out and the role was ultimately given to Carl Weathers. Norton had had three fights with Muhammad Ali, upon whom Creed was loosely based. According to The Rocky Scrapbook, Carrie Snodgress was originally chosen to play Adrian, but a money dispute forced the producers to look elsewhere. Susan Sarandon auditioned for the role but was deemed too pretty for the character. After Talia Shire's ensuing audition, Chartoff and Winkler, along with Avildsen, insisted that she play the part.[citation needed]Inventor/operator Garrett Brown's new Steadicam was used to accomplish smooth photography while running alongside Rocky during the film's Philadelphia street jogging/training sequences and the run up the Art Museum's flight of stairs. It was also used for some of the shots in the fight scenes and can be openly seen at the ringside during some wide shots of the final fight. (Rocky is often erroneously cited as the first film to use the Steadicam, although it was actually the third, after Bound for Glory and Marathon Man.[10])While filming Rocky, both Stallone and Weathers suffered injuries during the shooting of the final fight; Stallone suffered bruised ribs and Weathers suffered a damaged nose, the opposite injuries of what their characters had.[citation needed]The poster seen above the ring before Rocky fights Apollo Creed shows Rocky wearing red shorts with a white stripe when he actually wears white shorts with a red stripe. When Rocky points this out he is told that "it doesn't really matter does it?". According to director Avildsen's DVD commentary, this was an actual mistake made by the props department that they could not afford to rectify, so Stallone wrote the brief scene to ensure the audience didn't see it as a goof (Carl Weathers would, ironcally, wear white-striped red shorts for the the Creed-Balboa rematch in Rocky II). Avildsen said that the same situation arose with Rocky's robe. When it came back from the costume department, it was far too baggy for Stallone. And because the robe arrived on the day of filming the scene and there was no chance of replacing or altering it, instead of ignoring this and risk the audience laughing at it, Stallone wrote the dialogue where Rocky himself points out the robe is too big.The first date between Rocky and Adrian, in which Rocky bribes a janitor to allow them to skate after closing hours in a deserted ice skating rink, was shot that way only because of budgetary pressures. This scene was originally scheduled to be shot in a skating rink during regular business hours. However, the producers ultimately decided that they couldn't afford to hire the hundreds of extras that would have been necessary for that scene.Rocky has the 7th highest return of investment of any film ever made.[11] With a production budget of less than 1 million dollars,[2][3] it eventually earned worldwide box-office receipts exceeding $225 million.[1]The film draws inspiration from the careers of at least three boxers.The character's name and ethnicity harken to Rocky Marciano.The main plot of the film is based on the famous fight between Muhammad Ali and Chuck Wepner at Richfield Coliseum in Richfield, Ohio on March 24, 1975. Wepner had been TKO'd in the 15th round by Ali, but nobody ever expected him to last as long as he did. Wepner recalls in a January 2000 interview, "Sly [Stallone] called me about two weeks after the Ali fight and told me he was gonna make the movie."[citation needed]The Philadelphia setting and details of training (including using sides of beef) come from the life of Joe Frazier.The famous scene of Rocky running up the steps of the Philadelphia Museum of Art has become a cultural icon. In 1982, a statue of Rocky, commissioned by Stallone for Rocky III, was placed at the top of the Rocky Steps. City Commerce Director Dick Doran claimed that Stallone and Rocky had done more for the city's image than "anyone since Ben Franklin."[12]Differing opinions of the statue and its placement led to a relocation to the sidewalk outside the Philadelphia Spectrum Arena, although the statue was temporarily returned to the top of the steps in 1990 for Rocky V, and again in 2006 for the 30th anniversary of the original Rocky (although this time it was placed at the bottom of the steps). Later that year, it was permanently moved to a spot next to the steps.[12]The scene is frequently parodied in the media. In The Simpsons episode "I'm Spelling as Fast as I Can", Lisa Simpson runs up a flight of stairs wearing a tracksuit similar to the one worn by Rocky.[13] In You Don't Mess with the Zohan, Zohan's nemesis, Phantom, goes through a parodied training sequence finishing with him running up a desert dune and raising his hands in victory. In the fourth season's finale of The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, as the credits roll at the end of the episode, Will is seen running up the same steps of the Philadelphia Museum of Art; however, as he celebrates after finishing his climb, he passes out in exhaustion, and while he lies unconscious on the ground, a pickpocket steals his wallet and his wool hat. Also in The Nutty Professor, there is a scene where Eddie Murphy is running up the stairs and throwing punches at the top.In 2006, E! named the "Rocky Steps" scene #13 in its 101 Most Awesome Moments in Entertainment.[14]During the 1996 Summer Olympics torch relay, Philadelphia native Dawn Staley was chosen to run up the museum steps. In 2004, Presidential candidate John Kerry ended his pre-convention campaign at the foot of the steps before going to Boston to accept his party's nomination for President.[15]Rocky received mixed to positive reviews at the time of its release. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times, however, gave Rocky 4 out of 4 stars and said that Stallone reminded him of "the young Marlon Brando.[16] " Box Office Magazine claimed that audiences would be "touting Sylvester 'Sly' Stallone as a new star".[17][18] The film, however, did not escape criticism. Vincent Canby, of the New York Times, called it "pure '30s make believe" and dismissed both Stallone's acting and Avildsen's directing, calling the latter "none too decisive".[19] Frank Rich liked the film, calling it "almost 100 per cent schmaltz," but favoring it over the cynicism that was prevalent in movies at that time, although he referred to the plot as "gimmicky" and the script "heavy-handed". He attributed all of the film's weaknesses to Avildsen, describing him as responsible for some of the "most tawdry movies of recent years", and who "has an instinct for making serious emotions look tawdry" and said of Rocky, "He'll go for a cheap touch whenever he can" and "tries to falsify material that was suspect from the beginning. ... Even by the standards of fairy tales, it strains logic." Rich also criticised the film's "stupid song with couplets like 'feeling strong now/won't be long now.'"[20]Several reviews, including Richard Eder's (as well as Canby's negative review), compared the work to that of Frank Capra. Andrew Sarris found the Capra comparisons disingenuous: "Capra's movies projected more despair deep down than a movie like Rocky could envisage, and most previous ring movies have been much more cynical about the fight scene," and, commenting on Rocky's work as a loan shark, says that the film "teeters on the edge of sentimentalizing gangsters." Sarris also found Meredith "oddly cast in the kind of part the late James Gleason used to pick his teeth." Sarris also took issue with Avildsen's direction, which he described as having been done with "an insidious smirk" with "condescension toward everything and everybody," specifically finding fault, for example, with Avildsen's multiple shots of a chintzy lamp in Rocky's apartment. Sarris also found Stallone's acting style "a bit mystifying" and his character "all rough" as opposed to "a diamond in the rough" like Terry Malloy.[21]More than 30 years later, the film enjoys a reputation as a classic and still receives positive reviews; Rocky holds a 91% "Certified Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes.[22] Another positive online review came from the BBC Films website, with both reviewer Almar Haflidason and BBC online users giving it 5/5 stars.[23] In Steven J. Schneider's 1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die, Schneider says the film is "often overlooked as schmaltz."[24]In 2006, Rocky was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".[25][26]In June 2008, AFI revealed its "Ten top Ten"the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genresafter polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. Rocky was acknowledged as the second-best film in the sports genre, after Raging Bull.[27][28]In 2008, Rocky was chosen by Empire magazine as one of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time.[29]Rocky received ten Academy Awards nominations in nine categories, winning three:[30]Rocky has also appeared on several of the American Film Institute's 100 Years lists.The Directors Guild of America awarded Rocky its annual award for best film of the year in 1976, and in 2006, Sylvester Stallone's original screenplay for Rocky was selected for the Writers Guild of America Award as the 78th best screenplay of all time.[35]All music by Bill Conti.Rocky's soundtrack was composed by Bill Conti. The main theme song, "Gonna Fly Now", made it to number one on the Billboard magazine's Hot 100 list for one week (from July 2 to July 8, 1977) and the American Film Institute placed it 58th on its AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs.[37][38] The complete soundtrack was re-released in 1988 by EMI on CD and cassette.[39] Conti was also the composer for Rockys: II, III, V, and Rocky Balboa.[40]The version of "Gonna Fly Now" used in the film is different from the versions released on later CDs and records. The vocals and guitars are much more emphasized than the versions released. The "movie version" has yet to be released.[citation needed]Although the Conti version of "Gonna Fly Now" is the most recognizable arrangement, a cover of the song performed by legendary trumpeter Maynard Ferguson on his Conquistador album prior to the release of the motion picture soundtrack actually outsold the soundtrack itself.[41]A paperback novelization of the screenplay was written by Rosalyn Drexler and published by Ballantine Books in 1976[42]Several video games have been made based on the film. The first Rocky video game was released by Coleco for ColecoVision in August 1983 titled Rocky Super Action Boxing; the principal designer was Coleco staffer B. Dennis Sustare. Another was released in 1987 for the Sega Master System. More recently, a Rocky video game was released in 2002 for the Nintendo GameCube, Game Boy Advance, PlayStation 2, and Xbox, and a sequel, Rocky Legends, was released in 2004 for the PlayStation 2 and Xbox. In 2007, a video game called Rocky Balboa was released for PSP. In 1985, Dinamic Software released a boxing game for the Sinclair ZX Spectrum (also advertised for and/or published on the Sega Master System, Amstrad CPC and MSX) called Rocky. Due to copyright reasons it was quickly renamed "Rocco".[43]A musical has been written by Stephen Flaherty and Lynn Ahrens (lyrics and music) with the book by Thomas Meehan based on the film. The musical premiered in Hamburg, Germany in October 2012.[44]November 21, 1976(1976-11-21) (New York City premiere)December 3, 1976(1976-12-03) (US)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Stallone's inspiration

3.1.1 Rocky Steps



3.1 Stallone's inspiration

3.1.1 Rocky Steps

3.1.1 Rocky Steps4 Critical reception

4.1 Academy Awards  1976

4.1 Academy Awards  19765 Home video release history6 Other media

6.1 Soundtrack
6.2 Novelization
6.3 Video games
6.4 Theatre

6.1 Soundtrack6.2 Novelization6.3 Video games6.4 Theatre7 Notes8 External links3.1 Stallone's inspiration

3.1.1 Rocky Steps

3.1.1 Rocky Steps3.1.1 Rocky Steps4.1 Academy Awards  19766.1 Soundtrack6.2 Novelization6.3 Video games6.4 TheatreSylvester Stallone as Rocky Balboa, an enforcer for a loan shark by day and a semi-pro boxer by night. He is given the chance at the heavyweight title.Talia Shire as Adrian Pennino, Rocky's love interest; a quiet pet store clerk who falls in love with Rocky and supports him through his training.Burt Young as Paulie Pennino, Adrian's brother; a meat-packing plant worker by trade, Paulie permits Rocky to train in the freezer.Carl Weathers as Apollo Creed, Rocky's opponent and heavyweight champion. The character was influenced by the outspoken, real-life boxing great Muhammad Ali.[5]Burgess Meredith as Mickey Goldmill, Rocky's manager and trainer, a former bantamweight fighter from the 1920s and the owner of the local boxing gym.Thayer David as George Jergens, the fight promoter who has "promoted fights all over the world".Joe Spinnell as Tony Gazzo, loan shark and Rocky's employerTony Burton as Tony "Duke" Evers, Apollo Creed's manager and trainer (Burton's role became more prominent in later Rocky films)AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (1998) - #78.[31]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills (2001) - #52AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions (2002) - NominatedAFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains (2003)

Rocky Balboa - #7 Hero.[32]

Rocky Balboa - #7 Hero.[32]AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs (2004)

"Gonna Fly Now" - #58

"Gonna Fly Now" - #58AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes (2005)

"Yo, Adrian!" - #80.[33]

"Yo, Adrian!" - #80.[33]AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores (2005) - NominatedAFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers (2006) - #4.[34]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) (2007) - #57AFI's 10 Top 10 (2008) - #2 Sports FilmRocky Balboa - #7 Hero.[32]"Gonna Fly Now" - #58"Yo, Adrian!" - #80.[33]1982  CED Videodisc and VHS; VHS release is rental only; 20th Century Fox Video releaseOctober 27, 1990 (VHS and laserdisc)April 16, 1996 (VHS and laserdisc)March 24, 1997 (DVD)April 24, 2001 (DVD, also packed with the Five-Disc Boxed Set)December 14, 2004 (DVD, also packed with the Rocky Anthology box set)February 8, 2005 (DVD, also packed with the Rocky Anthology box set)December 5, 2006 (DVD and Blu-ray Disc  2-Disc Collector's Edition, the DVD was the first version released by Fox and was also packed with the Rocky Anthology box set and the Blu-ray was the first version released by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment)December 4, 2007 (DVD box set  Rocky The Complete Saga. This new set contains the new Rocky Balboa, but does not include the recent 2 disc Rocky. There are still no special features for Rocky II through Rocky V, although Rocky Balboa's DVD special features are all intact.)November 3, 2009 (Blu-ray box set - Rocky The Undisputed Collection. This release included six films in a box set. Previously, only the first film and Rocky Balboa were available on the format. Those two discs are identical to their individual releases, and the set also contains a disc of bonus material, new and old alike.[36])Official anthology siteRocky at the Internet Movie DatabaseRocky at the TCM Movie DatabaseRocky at AllRoviRocky at Box Office MojoRocky at Rotten TomatoesRocky @ at the Sports Movie GuideESPN.com Page2 Articles:

Reel Life Rocky by Jeff Merron
The Making of Rocky by Sylvester Stallone
A Movie of Blood, Spit and Tears by Royce Webb
Six Little Known Truths about Rocky by Ralph Wiley
Which Rocky is the real champ? by Bill Simmons

Reel Life Rocky by Jeff MerronThe Making of Rocky by Sylvester StalloneA Movie of Blood, Spit and Tears by Royce WebbSix Little Known Truths about Rocky by Ralph WileyWhich Rocky is the real champ? by Bill SimmonsReel Life Rocky by Jeff MerronThe Making of Rocky by Sylvester StalloneA Movie of Blood, Spit and Tears by Royce WebbSix Little Known Truths about Rocky by Ralph WileyWhich Rocky is the real champ? by Bill SimmonsThe Deer Hunter is a 1978 drama film directed and co-written by Michael Cimino about a trio of Russian American steel worker friends and their infantry service in the Vietnam War. The film stars Robert De Niro, Christopher Walken, John Savage, John Cazale, Meryl Streep and George Dzundza. The story takes place in Clairton, a small working class town on the Monongahela River south of Pittsburgh and then in Vietnam, somewhere in the woodland and in Saigon, during the Vietnam War.The film was based in part on an unproduced screenplay called The Man Who Came to Play by Louis Garfinkle and Quinn K. Redeker about Las Vegas and Russian Roulette. Producer Michael Deeley, who bought the script, hired writer/director Michael Cimino who, with Deric Washburn, rewrote the script, taking the Russian Roulette element and placing it in the Vietnam War. The film went over-budget and over-schedule and ended up costing $15 million. The scenes of Russian roulette were highly controversial on release.The film won five Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director, and was named by the American Film Institute as the 53rd Greatest Movie of All Time on the 10th Anniversary Edition of the AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list.Critics and film historians have often noted how the film is divided into three equal thirds or acts.[a 1]Act I - In Clairton, a small working class town in western Pennsylvania, in late 1967, Russian American steel workers Michael (De Niro), Steven (Savage), and Nick (Walken), with the support of their friends Stanley (Cazale), John (Dzundza) and Axel (Chuck Aspegren, his only movie role; he was a steel worker from Gary, Indiana), prepare for two rites of passage: marriage and military service. The opening scenes set the character traits of the three main characters. Michael is the no-nonsense, serious but unassuming leader, Steven the loving, near-groom, pecked at by his mother for not wearing a scarf with his tuxedo and Nick is the quiet, introspective man who loves hunting because, "I like the trees... you know... the way the trees are..." The recurring theme of "one shot", which is how Michael prefers to take down a deer, is introduced. Before the trio ships out, Steven and his girlfriend Angela (who is pregnant by another man but loved by Steven nonetheless) marry in an Orthodox wedding. In the meantime, Michael contains his feelings for Nick's girlfriend Linda (Streep). At the wedding reception held at the local VFW bar, the guys get drunk, dance, sing and have a good time, but then notice a soldier in a U.S. Army Special Forces uniform. Michael buys him a drink and tries to start a conversation with him to find out what Vietnam is like, but he ignores Michael. After Michael explains that he, Steven and Nick are going to Vietnam, the Green Beret raises his glass and says "fuck it" to everyone's shock and amazement. Obviously disturbed and under mental anguish, the soldier again toasts them with "fuck it". After being restrained by the others from starting a fight, Michael goes back to the bar and in a mocking jest to the soldier, raises his glass and toasts him with "fuck it". The soldier then glances over at Michael and grins smugly. Later, Steven and Angela drink from conjoined goblets; this is a traditional ceremony, and it is believed that if they drink without spilling any, they will have good luck for life. A drop of blood-red wine unknowingly spills on her wedding gown, foreshadowing the coming events. Near the end of the reception, Nick asks Linda to marry him, and she agrees. Later that night, after a drunk and naked Michael runs through the streets of town, Nick chases him down and begs Michael not to leave him "over there" if anything happens. The next day, Michael and the remaining friends go deer hunting one last time, and Michael again scores a deer with "one shot".Act II - The film then jumps abruptly to a war-torn village, where U.S. helicopters attack a communist occupied Vietnamese village with napalm. A North Vietnamese soldier throws a stick grenade into a hiding place full of civilians. An unconscious Mike (now a staff sergeant in the U.S. Army Special Forces) wakes up to see the NVA soldier shoot a woman carrying a baby. In revenge Mike kills him. Meanwhile a unit of UH-1 "Huey" helicopters drops off several U.S. infantrymen, Nick and Steven among them. Michael, Steven, and Nick unexpectedly find each other just before they are captured and held together in a riverside prisoner of war camp with other U.S. Army and ARVN prisoners. For entertainment, the sadistic guards force their prisoners to play Russian roulette and gamble on the outcome. All three friends are forced to play. Steven plays against Michael, who offers moral support, but breaks down, and loses control of the gun, grazing himself with the bullet when it goes off. Steven is punished by incarceration to an underwater cage, full of rats and the bodies of others who earlier faced the same fate. Michael and Nick end up playing against each other, and Michael convinces the guards to let them play with three bullets in the gun. After a tense match, they kill their captors and escape. Mike had earlier argued with Nick about whether Steven could be saved, but after killing their captors he rescues Steven. The three float downriver on a tree branch. An American helicopter accidentally finds them, but only Nick is able to climb aboard. The weakened Steven falls back into water and Mike plunges in the water to rescue him. Unluckily, Steven breaks both legs in the fall. Mike helps him to reach the river bank, and then carries him through the jungle to friendly lines. Approaching a caravan of locals escaping the war zone, he stops a South Vietnamese military truck and places the wounded Steven on it, asking the soldiers to take care of him. Nick, who is psychologically damaged apparently suffering amnesia, recuperates in a military hospital in Saigon with no knowledge on the status of his friends. At night, he aimlessly stumbles through the red-light district. At one point, he encounters Julien Grinda (Pierre Segui), a champagne-drinking friendly Frenchman outside a gambling den where men play Russian roulette for money. Grinda entices the reluctant Nick to participate, and leads him into the den. Mike is present in the den, watching the game, but the two friends do not notice each other at first. When Mike does see Nick, he is unable to get his attention. When Nick is introduced into the game he instead grabs the gun, fires it at the current contestant and then again at his own temple, causing the audience to riot in protest. Grinda hustles Nick outside to his car to escape the angry mob. Mike cannot catch up with Nick and Grinda as they speed away.Act III - Back in the U.S., Mike returns home but maintains a low profile. He tells the cab driver to pass by the house where all his friends are assembled, as he is embarrassed by the fuss made over him by Linda and the others. Mike goes to a motel and struggles with his feelings, as he thinks both Nick and Steven are dead or missing. He eventually visits Linda and grows close to her, but only because of the friend they both think they have lost. Mike is eventually told about Angela, whom he goes to visit at the home of Steven's mother. She is lethargic and barely responsive. She writes a phone number on a scrap of paper, which leads Mike to the local veterans' hospital where Steven has been for several months. Mike goes hunting with Axel, John and Stanley one more time, and after tracking a beautiful deer across the woods, takes his "one shot" but pulls the rifle up and fires into the air, unable to take another life. He then sits on a rock escarpment and yells out, "OK?", which echoes back at him from the opposing rock faces leading down to the river, signifying his fight with his mental demons over losing Steven and Nick. He also berates Stanley for carrying around a small revolver and waving it around, not realizing it is still loaded. He knows the horror of war and wants no part of it anymore. Mike visits Steven, who has lost both of his legs and is partially paralyzed. Steven reveals that someone in Saigon has been mailing large amounts of cash to him, and Mike is convinced that it is Nick. Mike brings Steven home to Angela and then travels to Saigon just before its fall in 1975. He tracks down the Frenchman Grinda, who has made a lot of money from the Russian-roulette-playing American. He finds Nick in a crowded roulette club, but Nick appears to have no recollection of his friends or his home in Pennsylvania. Mike sees the needle tracks on his arm, a sign of drug abuse. He realizes that Nick thinks he (Michael) and Steven are dead, since he is the only one who made it back on the helicopter.[clarification needed] Mike enters himself in a game of Russian roulette against Nick, hoping to jar Nick's memory and persuade him to come home, but Nick's mind is gone. In the last moment, after Mike's attempts to remind him of their trips hunting together, he finally breaks through, and Nick recognizes Mike and smiles. Nick then tells Mike, "one shot", raises the gun to his temple, and pulls the trigger. The bullet is in the gun's top chamber, and Nick kills himself. Horrified, Michael tries to revive him, but to no avail.Epilogue - Back home in 1975, there is a funeral for Nick, whom Michael brings home, good to his promise. The film ends with the whole cast at their friend's bar, singing "God Bless America" and toasting in Nick's honor.There has been considerable debate, controversy, and conflicting stories about how The Deer Hunter was initially developed and written.[5] Director and co-writer Michael Cimino, writer Deric Washburn, producers Barry Spikings and Michael Deeley all have different versions of how the film came to be.In 1968, the record company EMI formed a new company called EMI Films, headed by producers Barry Spikings and Michael Deeley.[5] Deeley purchased the first draft of a spec script called "The Man Who Came To Play", written by Louis Garfinkle and Quinn K. Redeker, for $19,000.[6] The spec script was about people who go to Las Vegas to play Russian Roulette.[5] "The screenplay had struck me as brilliant," wrote Deeley, "but it wasn't complete. The trick would be to find a way to turn a very clever piece of writing into a practical, realizable film."[7] When the movie was being planned during the mid-1970s, Vietnam was still a taboo subject with all major Hollywood studios.[6] According to producer Michael Deeley, the standard response was "no American would want to see a picture about Vietnam".[6]After consulting various Hollywood agents, Deeley found writer-director Michael Cimino, represented by Stan Kamen at the William Morris Agency.[7] Deeley was impressed by Cimino's TV commercial work and Thunderbolt and Lightfoot.[7][8] Cimino himself was confident that he could further develop the principal characters of The Man Who Came To Play without losing the essence of the original. After Cimino was hired, he was called into a meeting with Garfinkle and Redeker at the EMI office. According to Deeley, Cimino questioned the need for the Russian roulette element of the script and Redeker made such a passionate case for it that he ended up literally on his knees. Over the course of further meetings, Cimino and Deeley discussed the work needed at the front of the script and Cimino believed he could develop the stories of the main characters in twenty minutes of film.[8]Cimino worked for six weeks with Deric Washburn on the script.[9] Cimino and Washburn had previously collaborated with Stephen Bochco on the screenplay for Silent Running. According to producer Spikings, Cimino said he wanted to work again with Washburn.[5] According to producer Deeley, he only heard from office rumor that Washburn was contracted by Cimino to work on the script. "Whether Cimino hired Washburn as his sub-contractor or as a co-writer was constantly being obfuscated," wrote Deeley, "and there were some harsh words between them later on, or so I was told."[8] There are still questions as to whether Washburn/Cimino's script was entirely fiction.[clarification needed]According to Cimino, he would call Washburn while on the road scouting for locations and feed him notes on dialogue and story. Upon reviewing Washburn's draft, Cimino said, "I came back, and read it and I just could not believe what I read. It was like it was written by some body who was... mentally deranged." Cimino confronted Washburn at the Sunset Marquis in LA about the draft and Washburn supposedly replied that he couldn't take the pressure and had to go home. Cimino then fired Washburn. Cimino would later claim to have written the entire screenplay himself.[9] Washburn's response to Cimino's comments were, ""It's all nonsense. It's lies. I didn't have a single drink the entire time I was working on the script."[5]According to Washburn, he and Cimino spent three days together in L.A. at the Sunset Marquis, hammering out the plot. The script eventually went through several drafts, evolving into a story with three distinct acts. Washburn didn't interview any vets to write The Deer Hunter and didn't do any research. "I had a month, that was it," he explains. "The clock was ticking. Write the fucking script! But all I had to do was watch TV. Those combat cameramen in Vietnam were out there in the field with the guys. I mean, they had stuff that you wouldn't dream of seeing about Iraq." When Washburn was finished, he says, Cimino and Joann Carelli, an associate producer on The Deer Hunter who would go on to produce two more of Cimino's films, took him to dinner at a cheap restaurant off the Sunset Strip. He recalls, "We finished, and Joann looks at me across the table, and she says, 'Well, Deric, it's fuck-off time.' I was fired. It was a classic case: you get a dummy, get him to write the goddamn thing, tell him to go fuck himself, put your name on the thing, and he'll go away. I was so tired, I didn't care. I'd been working 20 hours a day for a month. I got on the plane the next day, and I went back to Manhattan and my carpenter job."[5]Deeley felt the revised script, now called The Deer Hunter, broke fresh ground for the project. The protagonist in the Redeker/Garfinkle script, Merle, was an individual who sustained a bad injury in active service and had been damaged psychologically by his violent experiences, but was nevertheless a tough character with strong nerves and guts. Cimino and Washburn's revised script distilled the three aspects of Merle's personality and separated them out into three distinct characters. They became three old friends who had grown up in the same small industrial town and worked in the same steel mill, and in due course would be drafted together to Vietnam.[10] In the original script, the roles of Merle (later renamed Mike) and Nick were reversed in the last half of the film. Nick returns home to Linda, while Mike remains in Vietnam, sends money home to help Steven, and meets his tragic fate at the Russian roulette table.[11]A Writers Guild arbitration process awarded Washburn sole "Screenplay By" credit.[5] Garfinkle and Redeker were given a shared "Story By" credit with Cimino and Washburn. Deeley felt the story credits for Garfinkle and Redeker "did them less than justice."[8] Cimino contested the results of the arbitration. "In their Nazi wisdom," added Cimino, "[they] didn't give me the credit because I would be producer, director and writer."[12] All four writers, Cimino, Washburn, Garfinkle and Redeker received an Oscar nomination for Best Original Screenplay for this film.[13]While producer Deeley was pleased with the revised script, he was still concerned about being able to sell the film. "We still had to get millions out of a major studio," wrote Deeley, "as well as convince our markets around the world that they should buy it before it was finished. I needed someone with the calibre of Robert De Niro."[14] De Niro was one of the biggest stars at that time, coming off Mean Streets, The Godfather Part II, and Taxi Driver. In addition to attracting buyers, Deeley felt De Niro was "the right age, apparently tough as hell, and immensely talented."[15]Hiring De Niro turned out to be a casting coup because he knew nearly every actor in New York. De Niro brought Meryl Streep to the attention of Cimino and Deeley. With Streep came John Cazale, Streep's romantic partner at the time, who was already very sick with cancer and would eventually die shortly afterwards.[16] De Niro also accompanied Cimino to scout locations for the steel-mill sequence as well as rehearse with the actors to use the workshops as a bonding process.[17]Each of the six principal male characters in the movie carried a photo in their back pocket of them all together as children so as to enhance the sense of camaraderie amongst them. As well as this, director Cimino had the props department fashion complete Pennsylvania IDs for each of them, complete with driver's licenses, medical cards and various other pieces of paraphernalia, so as to enhance each actor's sense of their character.[18]The Deer Hunter began principal photography on June 20, 1977.[5] This was the first feature film depicting the Vietnam War to be filmed on location in Thailand. All scenes were shot on location (no sound stages). "There was discussion about shooting the film on a back lot, but the material demanded more realism," says Spikings.[5] The cast and crew viewed large amounts of news footage from the war to ensure authenticity. The film was shot over a period of six months. The Clairton scenes comprise footage shot in eight different towns in four states: West Virginia, Pennsylvania, Washington, and Ohio.[5] The initial budget of the film was $8.5 million.[17]Before the beginning of principal photography began, Deeley had a meeting with the film's appointed line producer Robert Relyea. Deeley hired Relyea after meeting him on the set of Bullitt and was impressed with his experience. However Relyea told Deeley that he would not be able to be the producer on Deer Hunter. Relyea refused to disclose the reasons why.[17] Deeley suspected that Relyea had sensed in director Cimino something that would have made production difficult. As a result, Cimino was acting without day-to-day supervision of a producer.[24]Because Deeley was busy overseeing in the production of Sam Peckinpah's Convoy, he hired John Peverall to oversee Cimino's shoot. Peverall's expertise with budgeting and scheduling made him a natural successor to Relyea and knew enough about the picture to be elevated to producer status. "John is a straightforward Cornishman who had worked his way up to become a production supervisor," wrote Deeley, "and we employed him as EMI's watchman on certain pictures."[24]The wedding scenes were filmed at the historic St. Theodosius Russian Orthodox Cathedral in the Tremont neighborhood of Cleveland, Ohio.[5] The wedding took five days to film. An actual priest was cast as the priest at the wedding.[18] The reception scene was filmed at nearby Lemko Hall. The amateur extras lined up for the crowded wedding-dance sequences drank real liquor and beer.[25] The scenes were filmed in the summer, but were set in the fall.[18] To accomplish a look of fall, individual leaves were removed from deciduous trees.[26][27] Zsigmond also had to desaturate the colors of the exterior shots, partly in camera and in the laboratory processing.[27][28]The production manager asked each of the Russian immigrant extras to bring to the location a gift-wrapped box to double for wedding presents. The manager figured if the extras did this, not only would the production save time and money, but the gifts would also look more authentic. Once the unit had wrapped and the extras disappeared, the crew discovered to their amusement that the boxes weren't empty but filled with real presents, from china to silverware. "Who got to keep all these wonderful offerings," wrote Deeley "is a mystery I never quite fathomed."[25]Cimino had originally claimed that the wedding scene would take up 21 minutes of screentime. In the end, it took 51 minutes. Deeley believes that Cimino had always planned to make this prologue last for an hour, and "the plan was to be advanced by stealth rather than straight dealing."[29]At this point in the production, nearly halfway through principal photography, Cimino was already overbudget, and producer Spikings could tell from the script that shooting the extended scene could sink the project.[5]The bar was specially constructed in an empty storefront in Mingo Junction, Ohio for $25,000; it later became an actual saloon for local steel mill workers.[18] U.S. Steel allowed filming inside its Cleveland mill, including placing the actors around the furnace floor, only after securing a $5 million insurance policy.[18][21] Other filming took place in Pittsburgh. [1]The first deer to be shot was not actually harmed, despite the "gruesome close-up", but hit with a tranquilizer dart.[25][29] The stag which Michael allows to get away later was actually the same one used on TV commercials for the Connecticut Life Insurance Company.[25]The Viet Cong Russian roulette scenes were shot in real circumstances, with real rats and mosquitoes, as the three principals (De Niro, Walken, and Savage) were tied up in bamboo cages that had been erected along the River Kwai. The woman tasked with casting the extras out in Thailand had much difficulty finding a local to play the vicious individual who runs the Russian roulette game. The first actor hired turned out to be incapable of slapping De Niro in the face. The female caster thankfully knew a local Thai man with a particular dislike of Americans, and cast him accordingly. De Niro suggested that Walken be slapped for real from one of the guards without any forewarning to Walken. The reaction on Walken's face was genuine. Producer Deeley has said that Cimino shot the brutal Vietcong Russian roulette scenes brilliantly and more efficiently than any other part of the film.[25][30]De Niro and Savage performed their own stunts in the fall into the river, filming the 30ft drop 15 times in two days. During the helicopter stunt, the runners caught on the ropes of the suspension bridge and as the helicopter rose, it threatened to seriously injure De Niro and Savage. The actors gestured and yelled furiously to the crew in the helicopter to warn them. Footage of this is included in the film.[31]According to Cimino, De Niro requested a live cartridge in the revolver for the scene in which he subjects John Cazale's character to an impromptu game of Russian roulette, to heighten the intensity of the situation. Cazale agreed without protest,[9] but obsessively rechecked the gun before each take to make sure that the live round wasn't next in the chamber.[18]While appearing later in the film, the first scenes shot upon arrival in Thailand are the hospital sequences between Walken and the military doctor. Deeley believes that this scene was "the spur that would earn him an Academy Award."[32][a 2]In the final scene in the gambling den between Mike and Nick, Cimino had Walken and De Niro improvise in one take. His direction to his actors: "You put the gun to your head, Chris, you shoot, you fall over and Bobby cradles your head."[27]By this point, The Deer Hunter had cost $13 million.[28] The film still had to go through an arduous post-production. Film editor Peter Zinner was given 600,000feet of printed film to edit, a monumental task at the time.[40] Producers Spikings and Deeley were pleased with the first cut, which ran for three-and-a-half hours. "We were thrilled by what we saw," wrote Deeley, "and knew that within the three and a half hours we watched there was a riveting film."[41]Executives from Universal, including Lew Wasserman and Sid Sheinberg, were not very enthusiastic.[5][41] "I think they were shocked," recalled Spikings. "What really upset them was 'God Bless America.' Sheinberg thought it was anti-American. He was vehement. He said something like 'You're poking a stick in the eye of America.' They really didn't like the movie. And they certainly didn't like it at three hours and two minutes."[5] Thom Mount, president of Universal at the time, said, "This was just a fucking continuing nightmare from the day Michael finished the picture to the day we released it. That was simply because he was wedded to everything he shot. The movie was endless. It was The Deer Hunter and the Hunter and the Hunter. The wedding sequence was a cinematic event all unto its own."[5]Deeley wasn't surprised by the Universal response: "The Deer Hunter was a United Artists sort of picture, whereas Convoy was more in the style of Universal. I'd muddled and sold the wrong picture to each studio."[41] Deeley did agree with Universal that the film needed to be shorter, not just because of pacing but also to ensure commercial success.[42] "A picture under two and a half hours can scrape three shows a day," wrote Deeley, "but at three hours you've lost one third of your screenings and one third of your income for the cinemas, distibutors and profit participants."[42]Mount says he turned to Verna Fields, then Universal's head of post-production. "I sicked Verna on Cimino," Mount says. "Verna was no slouch. She started to turn the heat up on Michael, and he started screeching and yelling."[5] Zinner eventually cut the film down to 18,000feet.[40] Zinner was later fired by Cimino when he discovered that Zinner was editing down the wedding scenes.[26][43] Zinner eventually won Best Editing Oscar for The Deer Hunter. Regarding the clashes between him and Cimino, Zinner replied "Michael Cimino and I had our differences at the end, but he kissed me when we both got Academy Awards."[40] Cimino would later comment in The New York Observer, "[Zinner] was a moron... I cut Deer Hunter myself."[12]Both the long and short versions were previewed to midwestern audiences, although there are different accounts among Cimino, Deeley and Spikings as to how the previews panned out.[5] Director Cimino claims he bribed the projectionist to interrupt the shorter version, in order to obtain better reviews of the longer one.[9] According to producer Spikings, Wasserman let EMI's C.E.O. Delfont decide between the two and chose the Cimino's longer cut.[5] Deeley claims that the two-and-a-half hour version tested had a better response.[44]The soundtrack to The Deer Hunter was released on audio CD on October 25, 1990.[45]Deer Hunter debuted at one theater each in New York and Los Angeles for a week on December 8, 1978.[5][48][49] The release strategy was to qualify the film for Oscar consideration and close after a week to build interest.[50] After the Oscar nominations, Universal widened the distribution to include major cities, building up to a full-scale release on February 23, 1979, just following the Oscars.[48][50] This film was important for helping massage release patterns for so-called prestige pictures that screen only at the end of the year to qualify for Academy Award recognition.[51] The film eventually grossed $50,000,000 at the US box office.[2]CBS paid $3.5 million for three runs of the film. The network later cancelled the acquisition on the contractually permitted grounds of the film containing too much violence for US network transmission.[52]One of the most talked-about sequences in the film, the Vietcong's use of Russian roulette with POWs, was criticized as being contrived and unrealistic since there were no documented cases of Russian roulette in the Vietnam War.[4][5][53] Associated Press reporter Peter Arnett, who had won a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of the war, wrote in the Los Angeles Times, "In its 20 years of war, there was not a single recorded case of Russian roulette... The central metaphor of the movie is simply a bloody lie."[5] Director Cimino was also criticized for one-sidedly portraying all the North Vietnamese as despicable, sadistic racists and killers. Cimino countered that his film was not political, polemical, literally accurate, or posturing for any particular point of view.[4] He further defended his position by saying that he had news clippings from Singapore that confirm Russian roulette was used during the war (without specifying which article).[9]During the 29th Berlin International Film Festival in 1979, the Soviet delegation expressed its indignation with the film which, in their opinion, insulted the Vietnamese people in numerous scenes. Other socialist states also voiced their solidarity with the "heroic people of Vietnam". They protested against the screening of the film and insisted that it violated the statutes of the festival, since it in no way contributed to the "improvement of mutual understanding between the peoples of the world". The ensuing domino effect led to the walk-outs of the Cubans, East Germans, Bulgarians, Poles and Czechoslovakians, and two members of the jury resigned in sympathy.[54]In his review, Roger Ebert defended the artistic license of Russian roulette, arguing "it is the organizing symbol of the film: Anything you can believe about the game, about its deliberately random violence, about how it touches the sanity of men forced to play it, will apply to the war as a whole. It is a brilliant symbol because, in the context of this story, it makes any ideological statement about the war superfluous."[3]Film critic and biographer David Thomson also agrees that the film works despite the controversy: "There were complaints that the North Vietnamese had not employed Russian roulette. It was said that the scenes in Saigon were fanciful or imagined. And it was suggested that De Niro, Christopher Walken, and John Savage were too old to have enlisted for Vietnam (Savage, the youngest of the three, was 28). Three decades later, 'imagination' seems to have stilled those worries... and The Deer Hunter is one of the great American films."[55]In her review, Pauline Kael wrote, "The Vietcong are treated in the standard inscrutable-evil Oriental style of the Japanese in the Second World War movies... The impression a viewer gets is that if we did some bad things there we did them ruthlessly but impersonally; the Vietcong were cruel and sadistic."[5]In his Vanity Fair article "The Vietnam Oscars", Peter Biskind wrote that the political agenda of The Deer Hunter was something of a mystery: "It may have been more a by-product of Hollywood myopia, the demands of the war-film genre, garden-variety American parochialism, and simple ignorance than it was the pre-meditated right-wing road map it seemed to many."[5]According to Christopher Walken, the historical context wasn't paramount: "In the making of it, I don't remember anyone ever mentioning Vietnam!" De Niro added to this sentiment: "Whether [the film's vision of the war] actually happened or not, it's something you could imagine very easily happening. Maybe it did. I don't know. All's fair in love and war." Producer Spikings, while proud of the film, regrets the way the Vietnamese were portrayed. "I don't think any of us meant it to be exploitive," Spikings said. "But I think we were... ignorant. I can't think of a better word for it. I didn't realize how badly we'd behaved to the Vietnamese people..."[5]Producer Deeley, on the other hand, was quick to defend Cimino's comments on the nature and motives of the film: "The Deer Hunter wasn't really 'about' Vietnam. It was something very different. It wasn't about drugs or the collapse of the morale of the soldiers. It was about how individuals respond to pressure: different men reacting quite differently. The film was about three steel workers in extraordinary circumstances. Apocalypse Now is surreal. The Deer Hunter is a parable... Men who fight and lose an unworthy war face some obvious and unpalatable choices. They can blame their leaders.. or they can blame themselves. Self-blame has been a great burden for many war veterans. So how does a soldier come to terms with his defeat and yet still retain his self-respect? One way is to present the conquering enemy as so inhuman, and the battle between the good guys (us) and the bad guys (them) so uneven, as to render defeat irrelevant. Inhumanity was the theme of The Deer Hunter's portrayal of the North Vietnamese prison guards forcing American POWs to play Russian roulette. The audience's sympathy with prisoners who (quite understandably) cracked thus completes the chain. Accordingly, some veterans who suffered in that war found the Russian roulette a valid allegory."[56]Cimino frequently referred to The Deer Hunter as a "personal" and "autobiographical" film, although later investigation by journalists like Tom Buckley of Harper's revealed inaccuracies in Cimino's accounts and reported background.[57]The final scene in which all the main characters gather and sing "God Bless America" became a subject of heated debate among critics when the film was released.[5]The film's initial reviews were largely enthusiastic. It was hailed by many critics as the best American epic since Francis Ford Coppola's The Godfather.[33][57][58] The film was praised for its depiction of working-class settings and environment; Cimino's direction of the performances by De Niro, Walken, Streep, Savage, Dzundza and Cazale; the symphonic shifts of tone and pacing in moving from America to Vietnam; the tension during the Russian roulette scenes; and the themes of American disillusionment.[59][60]Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film four stars and called it "one of the most emotionally shattering films ever made."[3] Gene Siskel from the Chicago Tribune praised the film, saying, "This is a big film, dealing with big issues, made on a grand scale. Much of it, including some casting decisions, suggest inspiration by The Godfather."[61] Leonard Maltin also gave the film four stars, calling it a "sensitive, painful, evocative work".[62] Vincent Canby of the New York Times called The Deer Hunter "a big, awkward, crazily ambitious motion picture that comes as close to being a popular epic as any movie about this country since The Godfather. Its vision is that of an original, major new filmmaker."[58] David Denby of New York called it "an epic" with "qualities that we almost never see any more range and power and breadth of experience."[63][64] Jack Kroll of Time asserted it put director Cimino "right at the center of film culture."[64] Stephen Farber pronounced the film in New West magazine as "the greatest anti-war movie since La Grande Illusion."[64]However, The Deer Hunter was not without critical backlash, especially in light of the film's controversial use of Russian roulette at its center. Pauline Kael of The New Yorker wrote a positive review with some reservations: "[It is] a small minded film with greatness in it... with an enraptured view of common life... [but] enraging, because, despite its ambitiousness and scale, it has no more moral intelligence than the Eastwood action pictures."[64] Andrew Sarris wrote that the film was "massively vague, tediously elliptical, and mysteriously hysterical... It is perhaps significant that the actors remain more interesting than the characters they play."[5] John Simon of New York wrote: "For all its pretensions to something newer and better, this film is only an extension of the old Hollywood war-movie lie. The enemy is still bestial and stupid, and no match for our purity and heroism; only we no longer wipe up the floor with him -- rather, we litter it with his guts."[65]The film holds a metascore of 73 on Metacritic, based on 7 reviews,[66] and 91% fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 43 reviews.[60] The RT summary reads:Its greatness is blunted by its length and one-sided point of view, but the film's weaknesses are overpowered by Michael Cimino's sympathetic direction and a series of heartbreaking performances from Robert De Niro, Meryl Streep, and Christopher Walken.[60]Academy Award winning film director Milos Forman and Academy Award nominated actor Mickey Rourke consider The Deer Hunter to be one of the greatest films of all time.[70][71]Cimino's next film, Heaven's Gate, debuted to lacerating reviews and took in only $3 million in ticket sales, effectively leaving United Artists bankrupt. The failure of Heaven's Gate led several critics to revise their positions on The Deer Hunter. Canby said in his famous review of Heaven's Gate, "[The film] fails so completely that you might suspect Mr. Cimino sold his soul to the Devil to obtain the success of The Deer Hunter, and the Devil has just come around to collect."[72] Andrew Sarris wrote in his review of Heaven's Gate, "I'm a little surprised that many of the same critics who lionized Cimino for The Deer Hunter have now thrown him to the wolves with equal enthusiasm."[73] Sarris added, "I was never taken in... Hence, the stupidity and incoherence in Heaven's Gate came as no surprise since very much the same stupidity and incoherence had been amply evident in The Deer Hunter."[73] In his book Final Cut: Dreams and Disaster in the Making of Heaven's Gate, Steven Bach wrote, "critics seemed to feel obliged to go on the record about The Deer Hunter, to demonstrate that their critical credentials were un-besmirched by having been, as Sarris put it, 'taken in.'"[73]More recently, BBC film critic Mark Kermode challenged the film's status among generally praised film classics: "There is an unwritten rule in film criticism that certain films are beyond rebuke. Citizen Kane, Some Like It Hot, 2001, The Godfather Part II...all these are considered to be classics of such universally accepted stature... At the risk of being thrown out of the 'respectable film critics' circle, may I take this opportunity to declare officially that in my opinion The Deer Hunter is one of the worst films ever made, a rambling self indulgent, self aggrandising barf-fest steeped in manipulatively racist emotion, and notable primarily for its farcically melodramatic tone which is pitched somewhere between shrieking hysteria and somnambulist somberness."[74]However, many critics maintain that The Deer Hunter is still a great film whose power hasn't diminished, including David Thomson[59] and A.O. Scott.[75]Allan Carr, film producer and "old-fashioned mogul", used his networking abilities to promote The Deer Hunter. "Exactly how Allan Carr came into The Deer Hunter's orbit I can no longer remember," recalled producer Deeley, "but the picture became a crusade to him. He nagged, charmed, threw parties, he created word-of-mouth everything that could be done in Hollywood to promote a project. Because he had no apparent motive for this promotion, it had an added power and legitimacy and it finally did start to penetrate the minds of the Universal's sales people that they actually had in their hands something a bit more significant than the usual."[46] Deeley added that Carr's promotion of the film was influential in positioning The Deer Hunter for Oscar nominations.[50]On the Sneak Previews special "Oscar Preview for 1978", Roger Ebert correctly predicted that The Deer Hunter would win for Best Picture while Gene Siskel predicted that Coming Home would win. However, Ebert incorrectly guessed that Robert De Niro would win for Best Actor for Deer Hunter and Jill Clayburgh would win for Best Actress for An Unmarried Woman while Siskel called the wins for Jon Voight as Best Actor and Jane Fonda as Best Actress, both for Coming Home. Both Ebert and Siskel called the win for Christopher Walken receiving the Oscar for Best Supporting Actor.[33]According to producer Deeley, orchestrated lobbying against The Deer Hunter was led by Warren Beatty, whose own picture Heaven Can Wait had multiple nominations.[76] Beatty also used ex-girlfriends in his campaign: Julie Christie, serving on the jury at the Berlin Film Festival where Deer Hunter was screened, had joined the walkout of the film by the Russian jury members. Jane Fonda also criticized The Deer Hunter in public. Deeley suggested that her criticisms partly stemmed from the competition between her film Coming Home vying with The Deer Hunter for Best Picture. According to Deeley, he planted a friend of his in the Oscar press area behind the stage to ask Fonda if she had seen The Deer Hunter.[43] Fonda replied she had not seen the film, and to this day she still has not.[5][43]As the Oscars drew near, the backlash against The Deer Hunter gathered strength. When the limos pulled up to the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion on April 9, 1979, they were met by demonstrators, mostly from the Los Angeles chapter of Vietnam Veterans Against the War. The demonstrators waved placards covered with slogans that read "No Oscars for racism" and "The Deer Hunter a bloody lie" and thrust pamphlets berating Deer Hunter into long lines of limousine windows.[5][43] Washburn, nominated for Best Original Screenplay, claims his limousine was pelted with stones. According to Variety, "Police and The Deer Hunter protesters clashed in a brief but bloody battle that resulted in 13 arrests."[5]De Niro was so anxious that he did not attend the Oscars ceremony. He asked the Academy to sit out the show backstage, but when the Academy refused, De Niro stayed home in New York.[77] Producer Deeley made a deal with fellow producer David Puttnam, whose film Midnight Express was nominated, that each would take $500 to the ceremony so if one of them won, the winner would give the loser the $500 to "drown his sorrows in style."[76]The Deer Hunter won five Oscars at the 51st Academy Awards in 1979:In addition, the film was nominated in four other categories:Cimino won the film's only Golden Globe for Best Director. Other nominations the film included Best Motion Picture - Drama, De Niro for Best Motion Picture Actor - Drama, Walken for Best Motion Picture Actor in a Supporting Role, Streep for Best Motion Picture Actress in a Supporting Role, and Washburn for Best Screenplay - Motion Picture.[79]The Deer Hunter was one of the first, and most controversial, major theatrical films to be critical of the American involvement in Vietnam following 1975 when the war officially ended. While the film opened the same year as Hal Ashby's Coming Home, Sidney Furie's The Boys in Company C, and Ted Post's Go Tell the Spartans, it was the first film about Vietnam to reach a wide audience and critical acclaim, culminating in the winning of the Oscar for Best Picture. Other films released in the late 1970s and 1980s that illustrated the 'hellish', futile conditions of bloody Vietnam War combat included:[4]David Thomson wrote in an article titled "The Deer Hunter: Story of a scene" that the film changed the way war-time battles had been portrayed on film: "The terror and the blast of firepower changed the war film, even if it only used a revolver. More or less before the late 1970s, the movies had lived by a Second World War code in which battle scenes might be fierce but always rigorously controlled. The Deer Hunter unleashed a new, raw dynamic in combat and action, paving the way for Platoon, Saving Private Ryan and Clint Eastwood's Iwo Jima films."[80]The deaths of approximately twenty-five people who died playing Russian roulette were reported as having been influenced by scenes in the movie.[81]In 1996, The Deer Hunter was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".[79][82]The film ranks 467th in the Empire magazine's 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time,[83] noting:Cimino's bold, powerful 'Nam epic goes from blue-collar macho rituals to a fiery, South East Asian hell and back to a ragged singalong of America The Beautiful. De Niro holds it together, but Christopher Walken, Meryl Streep and John Savage are unforgettable.[83]Jan Scruggs, a Vietnam veteran who became a counselor with the U.S. Department of Labor, thought of the idea of building a National Memorial for Vietnam Veterans after seeing a screening of the film in March 1979, and he established and operated the memorial fund which paid for it.[84] Director Cimino was invited to the memorial's opening.[9]The Deer Hunter has twice been released on DVD in America. The first 1998 issue was by Universal, with no extra features and a non-anamorphic transfer, and has since been discontinued.[88] A second version, part of the "Legacy Series", was released as a two-disc set on September 6, 2005, with an anamorphic transfer of the film. The set features a cinematographer's commentary by Vilmos Zsigmond, deleted and extended scenes, and production notes.[89] The Region 2 version of The Deer Hunter, released in the UK and Japan, features a commentary track from director Michael Cimino.[90]The film was released on HD DVD on December 26, 2006.[91] StudioCanal released the film on the Blu-ray format in countries other than the United States on March 11, 2009.[92] It was released on Blu-ray in the U.S. on March 6, 2012.[93]December 8, 1978(1978-12-08)1 Plot2 Pre-production

2.1 Development
2.2 Screenplay

2.2.1 Cimino's claim
2.2.2 Washburn's claim
2.2.3 Deeley's reaction to the revised script


2.3 Casting

2.3.1 Full cast



2.1 Development2.2 Screenplay

2.2.1 Cimino's claim
2.2.2 Washburn's claim
2.2.3 Deeley's reaction to the revised script

2.2.1 Cimino's claim2.2.2 Washburn's claim2.2.3 Deeley's reaction to the revised script2.3 Casting

2.3.1 Full cast

2.3.1 Full cast3 Filming

3.1 The wedding scenes
3.2 The bar and the steel mill
3.3 Hunting the deer
3.4 Vietnam and the Russian roulette scenes
3.5 Filming locations

3.1 The wedding scenes3.2 The bar and the steel mill3.3 Hunting the deer3.4 Vietnam and the Russian roulette scenes3.5 Filming locations4 Post-production

4.1 Previews

4.1 Previews5 Soundtrack

5.1 Selected tracks

5.1 Selected tracks6 Release7 Analysis

7.1 Controversy over Russian roulette

7.1.1 Critics' response
7.1.2 Cast and crew response


7.2 Director Cimino's autobiographical intent
7.3 Coda of "God Bless America"

7.1 Controversy over Russian roulette

7.1.1 Critics' response
7.1.2 Cast and crew response

7.1.1 Critics' response7.1.2 Cast and crew response7.2 Director Cimino's autobiographical intent7.3 Coda of "God Bless America"8 Reception

8.1 Top-ten lists
8.2 Revisionism following Heaven's Gate

8.1 Top-ten lists8.2 Revisionism following Heaven's Gate9 Awards

9.1 Lead up to Awards Season
9.2 51st Academy Awards
9.3 Golden Globes

9.1 Lead up to Awards Season9.2 51st Academy Awards9.3 Golden Globes10 Legacy

10.1 Honors and recognitions
10.2 American Film Institute recognition

10.1 Honors and recognitions10.2 American Film Institute recognition11 Home media release12 See also13 References

13.1 Annotations
13.2 Notes
13.3 Bibliography

13.1 Annotations13.2 Notes13.3 Bibliography14 Further reading15 External links2.1 Development2.2 Screenplay

2.2.1 Cimino's claim
2.2.2 Washburn's claim
2.2.3 Deeley's reaction to the revised script

2.2.1 Cimino's claim2.2.2 Washburn's claim2.2.3 Deeley's reaction to the revised script2.3 Casting

2.3.1 Full cast

2.3.1 Full cast2.2.1 Cimino's claim2.2.2 Washburn's claim2.2.3 Deeley's reaction to the revised script2.3.1 Full cast3.1 The wedding scenes3.2 The bar and the steel mill3.3 Hunting the deer3.4 Vietnam and the Russian roulette scenes3.5 Filming locations4.1 Previews5.1 Selected tracks7.1 Controversy over Russian roulette

7.1.1 Critics' response
7.1.2 Cast and crew response

7.1.1 Critics' response7.1.2 Cast and crew response7.2 Director Cimino's autobiographical intent7.3 Coda of "God Bless America"7.1.1 Critics' response7.1.2 Cast and crew response8.1 Top-ten lists8.2 Revisionism following Heaven's Gate9.1 Lead up to Awards Season9.2 51st Academy Awards9.3 Golden Globes10.1 Honors and recognitions10.2 American Film Institute recognition13.1 Annotations13.2 Notes13.3 BibliographyRobert De Niro as S/Sgt. Michael "Mike" Vronsky. Producer Deeley pursued De Niro for The Deer Hunter because he felt that he needed De Niro's star power to sell a film with a "gruesome-sounding storyline and a barely known director".[15] "I liked the script, and [Cimino] had done a lot of prep," said De Niro. "I was impressed."[5] De Niro prepared by socializing with steelworkers in local bars and by visiting their homes. Cimino would introduce De Niro as his agent, Harry Ufland. No one recognized him.[9] De Niro claims this was his most physically exhausting film. He explained that the scene where Michael visits Steve in the hospital for the first time was the most emotional scene that he was ever involved with.[19]Christopher Walken as Cpl. Nikanor "Nick" Chevotarevich. His performance garnered his first Academy Award, for Best Supporting Actor.John Savage as Cpl. Steven Pushkov. Savage was a last-minute replacement for Roy Scheider, who dropped out of the production two weeks before the start of filming due to "creative differences"; Universal managed to keep Scheider to his three-picture contract by forcing him into doing Jaws 2.[20]Meryl Streep as Linda. Prior to Deer Hunter, Streep was seen briefly in Fred Zinnemann's Julia and the eight-hour miniseries Holocaust.[16] In the screenplay, Streep's role was negligible. Cimino explained the set-up to Streep and suggested that she write her own lines.[21]John Cazale as Stanley ("Stosh"). All scenes involving Cazale, who had terminal cancer, had to be filmed first. Because of his illness, the studio initially wanted to get rid of him, but Streep, whom he was dating at the time, and Cimino threatened to walk away if they did.[22][23] He was also uninsurable, and according to Streep, De Niro paid for his insurance because he wanted him in the film. This was his last film, as he died shortly after filming wrapped. Cazale never saw the finished film.[22]George Dzundza as John WelshChuck Aspegren as Peter "Axel" Axelrod. Aspegren was not an actor, he was the foreman at an East Chicago steel works visited early in pre-production by De Niro and Cimino. They were so impressed with him that they offered him the role. He was the second person to be cast in the film, after De Niro.[9]Shirley Stoler as Steven's motherRutanya Alda as Angela Ludhjduravic-PushkovAmy Wright as BridesmaidJoe Grifasi as BandleaderSt. Theodosius Russian Orthodox Cathedral, in the Tremont neighborhood of Cleveland, Ohio. The name plaque is clearly visible in one scene.[34]Lemko Hall, Cleveland, Ohio. Also located in Tremont, the wedding banquet was filmed here. The name is clearly visible in one scene.[35]US Steel Central Furnaces in Cleveland, Ohio. Opening sequence steel mill scenes.[36]Patpong, Bangkok, Thailand, the area used to represent Saigon's red light district.Sai Yok, Kanchanaburi Province, ThailandNorth Cascades National Park, Washington, mountain scenes.[37]Steubenville, Ohio, for some mill and neighborhood shots.Struthers, Ohio, for external house and long-range road shots. Also including, the town's bowling alley is the Bowladrome Lanes, located at 56 State Street, Struthers, Ohio.Weirton, West Virginia, for mill and trailer shots.[38]River Kwai, Thailand, Prison camp and initial Russian roulette scene.[39]Stanley Myers's "Cavatina" (also known as "He Was Beautiful"), performed by classical guitarist John Williams, is commonly known as "The Theme from The Deer Hunter". According to producer Deeley, he discovered that the song was originally written for a film called The Walking Stick (1970) and, as a result, had to pay the original purchaser an undisclosed sum.[46]"Can't Take My Eyes Off You", a 1967 hit song, sung by Frankie Valli.[a 3] It is played in John's bar when all of the friends sing along and at the wedding reception. According to Cimino, the actors sang along to a recording of the song as it was played instead of singing to a beat track, a standard filmmaking practice. Cimino felt that would make the sing-along seem more real.[18]During the wedding ceremonies and party, the Eastern Orthodox Church songs such as "Slava" and Russian folk songs such as "Korobushka" and "Katyusha" are played.Russian Orthodox funeral music is also employed during Nick's funeral scene, mainly "Vechnaya Pamyat", which means "eternal memory".[47]3rd - Roger Ebert, Chicago Sun-Times.[67] Ebert also placed Deer Hunter on his list of the best films of the 1970s.[68]3rd - Gene Siskel, Chicago Tribune[69]Best Picture (John Wayne's final public appearance was to present the award).[13]Best Director (Michael Cimino)Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Christopher Walken)Best Film EditingBest Sound (Richard Portman, William McCaughey, Aaron Rochin, Darin Knight).[4][13][78]Best Actor in a Leading Role (Robert De Niro)Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Meryl Streep)Best Cinematography (Vilmos Zsigmond)Best Writing, Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen (Michael Cimino, Deric Washburn, Louis Garfinkle and Quinn Redeker).[4][13]Francis Ford Coppola's Apocalypse Now (1979)Oliver Stone's Platoon (1986)Stanley Kubrick's Full Metal Jacket (1987)John Irvin's Hamburger Hill (1987)Oliver Stone's Born on the Fourth of July (1989)Brian De Palma's Casualties of War (1989)Robert Zemeckis's Forrest Gump (1994)AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #79[85]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills #30[86]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #53[87]The Deer Hunter (novel)The Last Hunter An Italian film originally made as an unofficial sequelBach, Steven (September 1, 1999). Final Cut: Art, Money, and Ego in the Making of Heaven's Gate, the Film That Sank United Artists (Updated 1999 ed.). New York, NY: Newmarket Press. ISBN 1-55704-374-4.Deeley, Michael (April 7, 2009). Blade Runners, Deer Hunters, & Blowing the Bloody Doors Off: My Life in Cult Movies (Hardcover ed.). New York, NY: Pegasus Books. ISBN 978-1-60598-038-6.Kachmar, Diane C. (2002). Roy Scheider: a film biography. McFarland. ISBN0-7864-1201-1.Parker, John (2009). Robert De Niro: Portrait of a Legend. London, England: John Blake Publishing ISBN 978-1-84454-639-8.McKee, Bruce (1997). Story (Hardcover ed.). New York, NY: HarperCollins Publishers. pp.126, 296-7, 308. ISBN 0-06-039168-5.Mitchell, Robert (writer); Magill, Frank N. (editor) (1980). "The Deer Hunter". Magill's Survey of Cinema: A-Eas. 1. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Salem Press pp.427431. ISBN 0-89356-226-2.The Deer Hunter at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Deer Hunter at AllRoviThe Wild Bunch is a 1969 American Western film directed by Sam Peckinpah[2] about an aging outlaw gang on the Texas-Mexico border, trying to exist in the changing "modern" world of 1913. The film was controversial because of its graphic violence and its portrayal of crude men attempting to survive by any available means.It stars William Holden, Robert Ryan, Ernest Borgnine, Ben Johnson and Warren Oates. The screenplay was by Peckinpah and Walon Green.The Wild Bunch is noted for intricate, multi-angle editing, using normal and slow motion images, a revolutionary cinema technique in 1969. The writing of Green, Peckinpah, and Roy N. Sickner was nominated for a best-screenplay Academy Award; Jerry Fielding's music was nominated for Best Original Score; Peckinpah was nominated for an Outstanding Directorial Achievement award by the Directors Guild of America; and cinematographer Lucien Ballard won the National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Cinematography.[3]In 1999, the U.S. National Film Registry selected it for preservation in the Library of Congress as culturally, historically, and aesthetically significant. The film was ranked 80th in the American Film Institute's 100 best American films, and the 69th most thrilling film.[4] In 2008, the AFI revealed its "10 Top 10" of the best ten films in ten genres: The Wild Bunch ranked as the sixth-best Western.[5][6]In 1913 Texas, Pike Bishop (William Holden), the leader of a gang of aging outlaws, is seeking retirement with one final score, namely the robbery of a railroad office containing a cache of silver. They are ambushed by Pike's former partner, Deke Thornton (Robert Ryan), and a posse of bounty hunters hired and deputized by the railroad. Thornton has been released from a Yuma prison to help track down his former comrades in return for a full pardon. A bloody shootout kills several of the gang. The town's citizens were not warned, so many are killed in the crossfire.Pike rides off with Dutch Engstrom (Ernest Borgnine), brothers Lyle (Warren Oates) and Tector Gorch (Ben Johnson), and Angel (Jaime Snchez), the only survivors. They are disappointed when the loot from the robbery turns out to be a decoy instead of silver. The men reunite with old-timer Freddie Sykes (Edmond O'Brien), and head for Mexico.Pike's men cross the Rio Grande and take refuge that night in a village where Angel was born, and where the Mexican Revolution has taken its toll. The townsfolk are ruled by a self-styled bandito warlord named Mapache (Emilio Fernndez), a general in the Mexican Federal Army, who has been stealing to feed his troops.In the town of Agua Verde (Spanish for "green water"), a den of debauchery, Pike's gang makes contact with the general. A jealous Angel spots a former lover in Mapache's arms and shoots her dead, angering Mapache. Pike defuses the situation and offers to work for Mapache. Their task is to steal a weapons shipment from a U.S. Army train so that Mapache can resupply his troops  and appease Mohr (Fernando Wagner), his German military adviser, who wishes to obtain samples of America's armament. Their reward will be a cache of gold coins.Angel gives up his share of the gold to Pike in return for sending one crate of the stolen rifles and ammunition to a band of rebels opposed to Mapache. Other than Dutch Engstrom having to be saved by Angel when he nearly fell under the train's wheels, the holdup goes as planned  until Deke's posse turns up on the very train the gang has robbed. The posse chases them to the Mexican border, only to be foiled again by an explosive booby trap which blows up a trestle and sends the entire posse into the Rio Grande.Pike and his men, knowing they risk being double crossed by Mapache, devise a way of bringing him the stolen weapons  including a Browning M1917 machine gun  without him double-crossing them. However, Mapache learns from the mother of the former lover Angel killed that Angel embezzled a crate of guns and ammo, and reveals this as Angel and Engstrom deliver the last of the weapons. Surrounded by Mapache's army, Angel desperately tries to escape, only to be captured, betrayed by Engstrom (who ironically calls him a "thief"), and tortured after Engstrom rides back to rejoin Pike's gang.Sykes, while securing the gang's spare horses, is wounded and forced into hiding after another encounter with Deke's posse. The rest of Pike's gang returns to Agua Verde for shelter, where a bacchanal celebrating the weapons purchase has commenced; to their disgust, they see Angel is being dragged on the ground by a rope tied behind the General's car. After a brief assignation and a period of reflection, Pike and the gang try to persuade Mapache to release Angel, barely alive after the torture. The general appears to comply; however, as they watch, the general cuts his throat instead. Pike and the gang angrily gun Mapache down in front of hundreds of his men. For a moment, the Federales are so shocked that they fail to return fire, causing Engstrom to laugh in surprise. Pike calmly takes aim at the German officer and kills him, too. This results in a violent, bloody showdown in which Pike and his men, along with the majority of the German and Mexican troops present, are killed.Deke finally catches up. He allows the remaining members of the posse to take the bullet-riddled bodies of the gang members back and collect the reward, while electing to stay behind, knowing what awaits the posse. After a period, Sykes arrives with a band of the previously seen Mexican rebels, who have killed off what's left of the posse along the way. He asks Deke to come along and join the revolution. Deke smiles and rides off with them.Director Sam Peckinpah considered many actors for the Pike Bishop role; Lee Marvin, Burt Lancaster, James Stewart, Charlton Heston, Gregory Peck, Sterling Hayden, Richard Boone and Robert Mitchum were all considered before William Holden was cast. Marvin actually accepted the role but pulled out after he was offered a larger pay deal to star in Paint Your Wagon (1969).[7][8]Sam Peckinpah's first two choices for the role of Deke Thornton were Richard Harris (who had co-starred in Major Dundee) and Brian Keith (who had worked with Peckinpah on The Westerner (1960) and The Deadly Companions (1961)). Harris was never formally approached, but Keith was, and turned the part down. Robert Ryan was ultimately cast in the part after Peckinpah saw him in the World War II action movie The Dirty Dozen (1967). Other actors considered for the role were Glenn Ford, Arthur Kennedy, Henry Fonda, Ben Johnson (later cast as Tector Gorch) and Van Heflin.Mario Adorf was considered for the part of Mapache; the role went to Emilio Fernndez, the Mexican film director and actor and friend of Peckinpah.[7] Among those considered to play Dutch Engstrom were Steve McQueen, George Peppard, Jim Brown, Alex Cord, Robert Culp, Sammy Davis, Jr., Charles Bronson and Richard Jaeckel. Ernest Borgnine was cast based on his performance in The Dirty Dozen.[9]Robert Blake was the original choice to play Angel, but he asked for too much money. Peckinpah had seen Jaime Snchez in the Broadway production of Sidney Lumet's The Pawnbroker, was impressed and demanded he be cast as Angel.[10] Albert Dekker, a stage actor, was cast as Harrigan, the railroad detective. He died months after filming; The Wild Bunch was his final film. Bo Hopkins played the part of Clarence "Crazy" Lee; he was cast after Peckinpah saw him on television.In 1967, Warner Bros.-Seven Arts producers Kenneth Hyman and Phil Feldman were interested in having Sam Peckinpah rewrite and direct an adventure film called The Diamond Story. A professional outcast due to the production difficulties of his previous film Major Dundee (1965) and his firing from the set of The Cincinnati Kid (1965), Peckinpah's stock had improved following his critically acclaimed work on the television film Noon Wine (1966). An alternative screenplay available at the studio was The Wild Bunch, written by Roy Sickner and Walon Green. At the time, William Goldman's screenplay Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid had recently been purchased by 20th Century Fox. It was quickly decided that The Wild Bunch, which had several similarities to Goldman's work, would be produced in order to beat Butch Cassidy to the theaters.[11][12][13][14]By the fall of 1967, Peckinpah was rewriting the screenplay and preparing for production. Filmed on location in Mexico, Peckinpah's epic work was inspired by his hunger to return to films, the violence seen in Arthur Penn's Bonnie and Clyde, America's growing frustration with the Vietnam War and what he perceived to be the utter lack of reality seen in Westerns up to that time. He set out to make a film which portrayed not only the vicious violence of the period, but the crude men attempting to survive the era. Multiple scenes attempted in Major Dundee, including slow motion action sequences (inspired by Akira Kurosawa's work in Seven Samurai), characters leaving a village as if in a funeral procession and the use of inexperienced locals as extras, would be perfected in The Wild Bunch.[15]The film was shot with the anamorphic process. Peckinpah and his cinematographer, Lucien Ballard, also made use of telephoto lenses, that allowed for objects and people in both the background and foreground to be compressed in perspective. The effect is best seen in the shots where the Bunch makes "the walk" to Mapache's headquarters to free Angel. As they walk forward, a constant flow of people pass between them and the camera, most of them are as sharply focused as the Bunch. The editing of the film is notable in that shots from multiple angles would be spliced together in rapid succession, often at different speeds, placing greater emphasis on the chaotic nature of the action and the gunfights.[citation needed]Lou Lombardo, having previously worked with Peckinpah on Noon Wine, was personally hired by the director to edit The Wild Bunch. Peckinpah had wanted an editor who would be loyal to him. Lombardo's youth was also a plus, as he wasn't bound by traditional conventions. One of Lombardo's first contributions was to show Peckinpah an episode of the TV series Felony Squad he edited in 1967. The episode, entitled "My Mommy Got Lost", included a slow motion sequence where Joe Don Baker is shot by the police. The scene mixed slow motion with normal speed. Peckinpah was reportedly thrilled and told Lombardo: "Let's try some of that when we get down to Mexico!" The director would film the major shootouts with six cameras, operating at various film rates, including 24 frames per second, 30 frames per second, 60 frames per second, 90 frames per second, and 120 frames per second. When the scenes were eventually cut together, the action would shift from slow to fast to slower still, giving time an elastic quality never before seen in motion pictures up to that time.[16][17]By the time filming wrapped, Peckinpah had shot 333,000 feet (101,000m) of film with 1,288 camera setups. Lombardo and Peckinpah remained in Mexico for six months editing the picture. After initial cuts, the opening gunfight sequence ran 21 minutes. Cutting frames from specific scenes and intercutting others, they were able to fine-cut the opening robbery down to five minutes. The creative montage became the model for the rest of the film and would forever change the way movies were made.[18]Peckinpah stated that one of his goals for this movie was to give the audience "some idea of what it is to be gunned down". A memorable incident occurred, to that end, as Peckinpah's crew were consulting him on the "gunfire" effects to be used in the film. Not satisfied with the results from the squibs his crew had brought for him, Peckinpah became exasperated; he finally hollered: "That's not what I want! That's not what I want!" He then grabbed a real revolver and fired it into a nearby wall. The gun empty, Peckinpah barked at his stunned crew: "THAT'S the effect I want!!" He also had the gunfire sound effects changed for the film. Before, all gunshots in Warner Brothers movies sounded identical, regardless of the type of weapon being fired. Peckinpah insisted on each different type of firearm having its own specific sound effect when fired.[citation needed]Critics of The Wild Bunch noted the theme of the end of the outlaw gunfighter era. Pike Bishop says: We've got to start thinking beyond our guns. Those days are closing fast. The Bunch live by an anachronistic code of honor without a place in twentieth century modern society. When they inspect General Mapache's new automobile, they perceive it marks the end of horse travel, a symbol also in Peckinpah's Ride the High Country (1962) and The Ballad of Cable Hogue (1970).[19]The violence that was much criticized by critics in 1969 remains controversial. Director Peckinpah noted it was allegoric of the American war in Vietnam, whose violence was nightly televised to American homes at supper time. He tried showing the gun violence commonplace to the historic western frontier period, rebelling against sanitized, bloodless television Westerns and films glamorizing gun fights and murder. "The point of the film is to take this faade of movie violence and open it up, get people involved in it so that they are starting to go in the Hollywood television predictable reaction syndrome, and then twist it so that it's not fun anymore, just a wave of sickness in the gut ... It's ugly, brutalizing, and bloody awful; it's not fun and games and cowboys and Indians. It's a terrible, ugly thing, and yet there's a certain response that you get from it, an excitement, because we're all violent people." Peckinpah used violence as catharsis, believing his audience would be purged of violence, by witnessing it explicitly on screen. He later admitted to being mistaken, that the audience came to enjoy rather than be horrified by his films' violence, something that troubled him.[20]Betrayal is the secondary theme of The Wild Bunch. The characters suffer from their knowledge of having betrayed a friend and left him to his fate, thus violating their own honor code when it suits them ("10,000 dollars cuts an awful lot of family ties."). However, Pike Bishop says, "When you side with a man, you stay with him, and if you can't do that you're like some animal."[21] Such complex oppositional ideas lead to the film's violent conclusion, as the remaining men find their abandonment of Angel intolerable. Pike Bishop remembers his betrayals, most notably when he deserts Deke Thornton (in flashback) when the law catches up to them; and when he abandons Crazy Lee at the bank after the robbery (ostensibly to guard the hostages).Note that in the era of the film's release, there was a man named Bishop Pike, an Episcopal bishop who very publicly opposed the Vietnam War and was featured in mass media as such.Vincent Canby began his review by calling the film "very beautiful and the first truly interesting American-made Western in years. It's also so full of violence of an intensity that can hardly be supported by the story  that it's going to prompt a lot of people who do not know the real effect of movie violence (as I do not) to write automatic condemnations of it."[22] He said "although the movie's conventional and poetic action sequences are extraordinarily good and its landscapes beautifully photographed..., it is most interesting in its almost jolly account of chaos, corruption, and defeat"; among the actors, he commented particularly on William Holden: "After years of giving bored performances in boring movies, Holden comes back gallantly in The Wild Bunch. He looks older and tired, but he has style, both as a man and as a movie character who persists in doing what he's always done, not because he really wants the money but because there's simply nothing else to do." Time also liked Holden's performance, describing it as his best since Stalag 17 (a 1953 film that earned Holden an Oscar), said Robert Ryan gave "the screen performance of his career" and concluded that "The Wild Bunch contains faults and mistakes" (such as flashbacks "introduced with surprising clumsiness"), but "its accomplishments are more than sufficient to confirm that Peckinpah, along with Stanley Kubrick and Arthur Penn, belongs with the best of the newer generation of American film makers."[23]In a 2002 retrospective, Roger Ebert, who "saw the original version at the world premiere in 1969, during the golden age of the junket, when Warner Bros. screened five of its new films in the Bahamas for 450 critics and reporters", said that back then he had publicly declared the film a masterpiece during the junket's press conference, prompted by comments from "a reporter from the Reader's Digest [who] got up to ask 'Why was this film ever made?'"[24] He compared the film to Pulp Fiction: "praised and condemned with equal vehemence."Produced on a budget of $6 million, the film grossed $10,500,000 at the box office.[1] It was the 17th highest grossing film of 1969. The film holds a 97% "Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on reviews from 39 critics.[25] The film also ranks at number 94 on Empire magazine's list of the 500 Greatest Films of All Time.[26]Sam Peckinpah and the making of The Wild Bunch were the subjects of the documentary The Wild Bunch: An Album in Montage (1996) that was directed edited by Paul Seydor; the documentary was occasioned by the discovery of 72 minutes of silent, black and white film footage of Peckinpah and company on location in northern Mexico during the filming of The Wild Bunch. Michael Sragow wrote in 2000 that the documentary was "a wonderful introduction to Peckinpahs radically detailed historical film about American outlaws in revolutionary Mexico  a masterpiece thats part bullet-driven ballet, part requiem for Old West friendship and part existential explosion. Seydors movie is also a poetic flight on the myriad possibilities of movie directing."[27] Seydor and his co-producer Nick Redman were nominated in 1997 for the Academy Award for Best Documentary (Short Subject).[28]Following its release, Peckinpah was one of ten directors receiving a nomination for the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing  Feature Film. The film received two Academy Award nominations, for Best Original Screenplay (Walon Green, Roy N. Sickner, Sam Peckinpah) and Best Original Music Score (Jerry Fielding) At the 42nd Academy Awards ceremony, both awards went to crew members of Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (screen writer William Goldman and composer Burt Bacharach).Decades later, the American Film Institute placed the film in several of its "100 Years" lists:In 1999, the U.S. National Film Registry selected it for preservation in the Library of Congress as culturally, historically, and aesthetically significant.[29]In 1993, Warner Bros. resubmitted the film to the MPAA ratings board prior to an expected re-release. To the studio's surprise, the originally R-rated film was given an NC-17, delaying the release until the decision was appealed.[30] The controversy was linked to 10 extra minutes added to the film, although none of this footage contained graphic violence. Warner Bros. trimmed some footage to decrease the running time to ensure additional daily screenings.[31] When the restored film finally made it to the screen in March 1995, one reviewer noted:By restoring 10 minutes to the film, the complex story now fits together in a seamless way, filling in those gaps found in the previous theatrical release, and proving that Peckinpah was firing on all cylinders for this, his grandest achievement.... And the one overwhelming feature that the director's cut makes unforgettable are the many faces of the children, whether playing, singing, or cowering, much of the reaction to what happens on-screen is through the eyes, both innocent and imitative, of all the children.[32]Today, almost all of the versions of the film include the missing scenes. Warner Bros. released a newly restored version in a two-disc special edition on January 10, 2006. It includes an audio commentary by Peckinpah scholars, two documentaries concerning the making of the film and never-before-seen outtakes.There have been several versions of the film:On January 19, 2011, it was announced by Warner Bros. that The Wild Bunch would be remade.[33]July 18, 1969(1969-07-18)1 Plot2 Cast3 Casting4 Production5 Themes6 Reception7 Documentary8 Awards, honors, and nominations9 Versions10 Remake11 References12 External linksWilliam Holden as Pike BishopErnest Borgnine as Dutch EngstromRobert Ryan as Deke ThorntonEdmond O'Brien as Freddie SykesWarren Oates as Lyle GorchJaime Snchez as AngelBen Johnson as Tector GorchEmilio Fernndez as General MapacheStrother Martin as CofferL. Q. Jones as T.C.Albert Dekker as Pat HarriganBo Hopkins as Clarence 'Crazy' LeeJorge Russek as Major ZamorraAlfonso Arau as Lieutenant HerreraDub Taylor as PreacherRayford Barnes as BuckPaul Harper as RossChano Urueta as Don JosElsa Crdenas as ElsaBill Hart as JessStephen Ferry as Sergeant McHaleFernando Wagner as Commander MohrJorge Rado as ErnstAurora Clavel as AuroraAFI's 100 Years100 Movies  #80AFI's 100 Years100 Thrills  #69AFI's 100 Years100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #79AFI's 10 Top 10  #6 WesternThe original, 1969 European release is 145 minutes long, with an intermission (per distributor's request, before the train robbery).The original, 1969 American release is 143 minutes long.The second, 1969 American release is 135 minutes long, shortened to allow more screenings.The 1995 re-release is 145 minutes long, identical to the 1969 European release, the version labeled "The Original Director's Cut", available in home video.The Wild Bunch at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Wild Bunch at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Wild Bunch at AllRoviThe Wild Bunch at Filmsite.orgModern Times is a 1936 comedy film written and directed by Charlie Chaplin in which his iconic Little Tramp character struggles to survive in the modern, industrialized world. The film is a comment on the desperate employment and fiscal conditions many people faced during the Great Depression, conditions created, in Chaplin's view, by the efficiencies of modern industrialization. The movie stars Chaplin, Paulette Goddard, Henry Bergman, Stanley Sandford and Chester Conklin.Modern Times was deemed "culturally significant" by the Library of Congress in 1989, and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. Fourteen years later, it was screened "out of competition" at the 2003 Cannes Film Festival.[1]Modern Times portrays Chaplin as a factory worker employed on an assembly line. After being subjected to such indignities as being force-fed by a "modern" feeding machine and an accelerating assembly line where he screws nuts at an ever-increasing rate onto pieces of machinery, he suffers a nervous breakdown and runs amok, throwing the factory into chaos. He is sent to a hospital. Following his recovery, the now unemployed factory worker is mistakenly arrested as an instigator in a Communist demonstration. In jail, he accidentally ingests smuggled cocaine, mistaking it for salt. In his subsequent delirium, he stumbles upon a jailbreak and knocks out the convicts. He is hailed a hero and is released.Outside the jail, he discovers life is harsh, and tries to get arrested after failing to get a decent job. He runs into an orphaned gamine girl (Paulette Goddard), who is fleeing the police after stealing a loaf of bread. To save the girl, he tells police that he is the thief and ought to be arrested. A witness reveals his deception and he is freed. To get arrested again, he eats an enormous amount of food at a cafeteria without paying. He meets up with the gamine in the paddy wagon, which crashes, and the girl convinces the reluctant factory worker to escape with her. Dreaming of a better life, he gets a job as a night watchman at a department store, sneaks the gamine into the store, and even lets burglars have some food. Waking up the next morning in a pile of clothes, he is arrested once more.Ten days later, the gamine takes him to a new homea run-down shack that she admits "isn't Buckingham Palace" but will do. The next morning, the factory worker reads about a new factory and lands a job there. He gets his boss trapped in machinery, but manages to extricate him. The other workers decide to go on strike. Accidentally paddling a brick into a policeman, he is arrested again. Two weeks later, he is released and learns that the gamine is a caf dancer. She tries to get him a job as a singer. By night, he becomes an efficient waiter though he finds it difficult to tell the difference between the "in" and "out" doors to the kitchen, or to successfully deliver a roast duck to table through a busy dance floor. During his floor show, he loses a cuff that bears the lyrics of his song, but he rescues his act by improvising the story using an amalgam of word play, words in (or made up of word parts from) multiple languages and mock sentence structure while pantomiming. His act proves a hit. When police arrive to arrest the gamine for her earlier escape, they escape again. Finally, we see them walking down a road at dawn, towards an uncertain but hopeful future.During a European tour promoting City Lights, Chaplin got the inspiration for Modern Times from both the lamentable conditions of the continent through the Great Depression, along with a conversation with Mahatma Gandhi in which the Indian complained about "machinery with only consideration of profit".[2]Chaplin began preparing the film in 1934 as his first "talkie", and went as far as writing a dialogue script and experimenting with some sound scenes. However, he soon abandoned these attempts and reverted to a silent format with synchronized sound effects. The dialogue experiments confirmed his long-standing conviction that the universal appeal of the Tramp would be lost if the character ever spoke on screen. Most of the film was shot at "silent speed", 18 frames per second, which when projected at "sound speed", 24 frames per second, made the slapstick action appear even more frenetic. Available prints of the film now correct this. The duration of filming was long, beginning on October 11, 1934 and ending on August 30, 1935.[3]The reference to drugs seen in the prison sequence is somewhat daring for the time (since the production code, established in 1930, forbade the depiction of illegal drug use in films); Chaplin had made drug references before in one of his most famous short films, Easy Street, released in 1917.According to the official documents, the music score was composed by Chaplin himself, and arranged with the assistance of Alfred Newman. The romance theme was later given lyrics, and became the pop standard "Smile", first recorded by Nat King Cole and later covered by artists as Sammy Davis Jr., Dean Martin, Tony Bennett, Trini Lopez, Eric Clapton, Barbra Streisand, Diana Ross, Michael Bubl, Petula Clark, Liberace, Judy Garland, Madeleine Peyroux, Plcido Domingo and Dionne Warwick, Michael Jackson and Robert Downey, Jr. (included on the soundtrack for the film Chaplin).Modern Times was the first film where Chaplin's voice is heard as he performs Lo Daniderff's comical song Je cherche aprs Titine. Chaplin's version is also known as The Nonsense Song, as his character has to sing it in gibberish (due to losing the shirt cuff on which the lyrics were written, and thus having to make up the lyrics on the spot). The lyrics are nonsensical but appear to contain words from French and Italian; the use of deliberately half-intelligible wording for comic effect points the way towards Hynkel's speeches in The Great Dictator.According to film composer David Raksin, the music was written by him as a young man wanting to make a name for himself. Chaplin would sit, often in the washroom, humming tunes and telling Raksin to "take this down". Raksin's job was to turn the humming into a score and create timings and synchronization that fit the situations. Chaplin was a violinist and had some musical knowledge, but he was not an orchestrator and was unfamiliar with synchronization. Raksin later created scores for such films as Laura and The Day After.Modern Times is often hailed as one of Chaplin's greatest achievements, and it remains one of his most popular films. French philosophers Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir and Maurice Merlau-Ponty named their journal, Les Temps modernes, after it.[4] The iconic depiction of Chaplin working frantically to keep up with an assembly line inspired later comedy routines including Disney's Der Fuehrer's Face (Donald Duck alternately assembling artillery shells and saluting portraits of Adolf Hitler) and an episode of I Love Lucy titled "Job Switching" (Lucy and Ethel trying to keep up with an ever-increasing volume of chocolate candies, eventually stuffing them in their mouths, hats, and blouses). This was Chaplin's first overtly political-themed film, and its unflattering portrayal of industrial society generated controversy in some quarters upon its initial release.The film exhibits notable similarities to a 1931 French film directed by Ren Clair entitled  nous la libert (Liberty for Us) the assembly line sequence is a clear instance. The German film company Tobis Film sued Chaplin following the film's release to no avail. They sued again after World War II (considered revenge for Chaplin's later anti-Nazi statements in The Great Dictator).[5] This time, they settled with Chaplin out of court.  nous la libert director Clair was an outspoken admirer of Chaplin, was flattered by the notion that the film icon might imitate him, deeply embarrassed that Tobis Film would sue Chaplin and was never part of the case.The film did attract criticism for being almost completely silent, despite the movie industry having long since embraced the talking picture. Chaplin famously feared that the mystery and romanticism of the tramp character would be ruined if he spoke, and feared it would alienate his fans in non-English speaking territories. His future films, however, would be fully fledged "talkies" although without the character of the Little Tramp.1 Plot2 Production3 Music4 Reception

4.1 American Film Institute recognition

4.1 American Film Institute recognition5 See also6 References7 External links4.1 American Film Institute recognitionAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #81AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs - #33AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - Nominated[6]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #78List of United States comedy films Nous la LibertModern Times at the Internet Movie DatabaseModern Times (film) at Rotten TomatoesModern Times at the TCM Movie DatabaseModern Times at AllRoviFilmsite Modern Times pageMovie stills and bibliographySpartacus is a 1960 American epic historical drama film directed by Stanley Kubrick and based on the novel of the same name by Howard Fast. The life story of the historical figure Spartacus and the events of the Third Servile War were adapted by Dalton Trumbo as a screenplay.The film stars Kirk Douglas as rebellious slave Spartacus and Laurence Olivier as his foe, the Roman general and politician Marcus Licinius Crassus. Co-starring are Peter Ustinov (who won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role as slave trader Lentulus Batiatus), John Gavin (as Julius Caesar), Jean Simmons, and Charles Laughton. The film won four Oscars in all.Anthony Mann, the film's original director, was replaced by Douglas with Kubrick after the first week of shooting.[1]Screenwriter Dalton Trumbo was blacklisted at the time as one of the Hollywood Ten. Kirk Douglas publicly announced that Trumbo was the screenwriter of Spartacus, and President-elect John F. Kennedy crossed picket lines to see the movie, helping to end blacklisting.[2]The film became the biggest moneymaker in Universal Studios' history, an honor it held for a decade until it was surpassed by Airport (1970).[3]In the first century BC, the Roman Republic has slid into corruption, its menial work done by armies of slaves. One of these, a proud and gifted man named Spartacus, is so uncooperative in his servitude that he is sentenced to fight as a gladiator. He is trained at a school run by the unctuous Roman businessman Lentulus Batiatus, who instructs Spartacus's trainer Marcellus to bully the slave mercilessly and break his spirit. Amid the abuse, Spartacus forms a quiet relationship with a serving woman named Varinia, whom he refuses to rape when she is sent to "entertain" him in his cell.Batiatus receives a visit from the Roman senator Marcus Licinius Crassus, an arch-conservative who aims to become dictator of Rome. Crassus buys Varinia on a whim, and for the amusement of his companions arranges for Spartacus and three others to fight in pairs. When Spartacus is disarmed, his opponent, an African named Draba, spares his life in a burst of compassion and attacks the Roman audience. Crassus kills Draba. The next day, with the school's atmosphere still tense over this episode, Batiatus takes Varinia away to Crassus' house in Rome. Spartacus kills Marcellus, who was taunting him over this, and their fight escalates into a riot. The gladiators overwhelm their guards and escape into the Italian countryside.Spartacus is elected chief of the fugitives and decides to lead them out of Italy and back to their homes. They plunder Roman country estates as they go, collecting enough money to buy sea transport from Rome's foes the pirates of Cilicia. Countless other slaves join the group, making it as large as an army. One of the new arrivals is Varinia, who escaped while being delivered to Crassus. Another is a slave entertainer named Antoninus, who also fled Crassus' service after the Roman tried to seduce him. Privately Spartacus feels mentally inadequate because of his lack of education during years of servitude. However, he proves an excellent leader and organizes his diverse followers into a tough and self-sufficient community. Varinia, now his informal wife, becomes pregnant by him, and he also comes to regard the spirited Antoninus as a sort of son.The Roman Senate becomes increasingly alarmed as Spartacus defeats the multiple armies it sends against him. Crassus' populist opponent Gracchus knows that his rival will try to use the crisis as a justification for seizing control of the Roman army. To try and prevent this, Gracchus channels as much military power as possible into the hands of his own protege, a young senator named Julius Caesar. Although Caesar lacks Crassus' contempt for the lower classes of Rome, he mistakes the man's rigid outlook for nobility. Thus, when Gracchus reveals that he has bribed the Cilicians to get Spartacus out of Italy and rid Rome of the slave army, Caesar regards such tactics as beneath him and goes over to Crassus.Crassus uses a bribe of his own to make the pirates abandon Spartacus and has the Roman army secretly force the rebels away from the coastline towards Rome. Amid panic that Spartacus means to sack the city, the Senate gives Crassus absolute power. Now surrounded by Romans, Spartacus convinces his men to die fighting. Just by rebelling, and proving themselves human, he says, they have struck a blow against slavery. In the ensuing battle, most of the slave army is massacred by Crassus' forces. Afterward, when the Romans try to locate the rebel leader for special punishment, every surviving man shields him by shouting "I'm Spartacus!"Meanwhile, Crassus has found Varinia and Spartacus' newborn son and has taken them prisoner. He is disturbed by the idea that Spartacus can command more love and loyalty than he can and hopes to compensate by making Varinia as devoted to him as she was to her former husband. When she rejects him, he furiously seeks out Spartacus (who he recognizes from having watched him in the arena) and forces him to fight Antoninus to the death. The survivor is to be crucified, along with all the other men captured after the great battle. Spartacus kills Antoninus to spare him this fate. The incident leaves Crassus worried about Spartacus' potential to live in legend as a martyr. In other matters he is also worried about Caesar, who he senses will someday eclipse him.Gracchus, having seen Rome fall into tyranny, commits suicide. Before doing so, he bribes his friend Batiatus to rescue Spartacus' family from Crassus and carry them away to freedom. On the way out of Rome, the group pass under Spartacus' cross. Varinia is able to comfort him in his dying moments by showing him his little son, who will grow up without ever having been a slave.The development of Spartacus was partly instigated by Kirk Douglas's failure to win the title role in William Wyler's Ben-Hur. Douglas had worked with Wyler before on Detective Story, and was disappointed when Wyler chose Charlton Heston instead. Shortly after, Edward (Eddie) Lewis, a vice-president in Douglas's production company, Bryna (named after Douglas's mother), had Douglas read Howard Fast's novel, Spartacus, which had a related themean individual who challenges the might of the Roman Empireand Douglas was impressed enough to purchase an option on the book from Fast with his own financing. Universal Studios eventually agreed to finance the film after Douglas persuaded Olivier, Laughton and Ustinov to act in it. Lewis became the producer of the film, with Douglas taking executive producer credit. Lewis went on to produce several more films for Douglas.[1]Originally, Howard Fast was hired to adapt his own novel as a screenplay, but he had difficulty working in the format. He was replaced by Dalton Trumbo, who had been blacklisted as one of the Hollywood Ten. He used the pseudonym "Sam Jackson".Kirk Douglas insisted that Trumbo be given screen credit for his work, which helped to break the blacklist.[4] Trumbo had been jailed for contempt of Congress in 1950, after which he had been surviving by writing screenplays under assumed names. Douglas' intervention on his behalf was praised as an act of courage.In his autobiography, Douglas states that this decision was motivated by a meeting that he, Edward Lewis and Kubrick had regarding whose name/s to put against the screenplay in the movie credits, given Trumbo's shaky position with Hollywood executives. One idea was to credit Lewis as co-writer or sole writer, but Lewis vetoed both suggestions. Kubrick then suggested that his own name be used. Douglas and Lewis found Kubrick's eagerness to take credit for Trumbo's work revolting, and the next day, Douglas called the gate at Universal saying, "I'd like to leave a pass for Dalton Trumbo." Douglas writes, "For the first time in ten years, [Trumbo] walked on to a studio lot. He said, 'Thanks, Kirk, for giving me back my name.'"[1]The filming was plagued by the conflicting visions of Kubrick and Trumbo. Kubrick complained that the character of Spartacus had no faults or quirks, and he later distanced himself from the film.[5] Despite the on-set troubles, Spartacus's critical and commercial success established Kubrick as a major director.After David Lean turned down an offer to direct, Spartacus was to be directed by veteran Anthony Mann, then best known for his Westerns such as Winchester '73 and The Naked Spur. Douglas fired Mann at the end of the first week of shooting, in which the opening sequence in the quarry had been filmed. "He seemed scared of the scope of the picture," wrote Douglas in his autobiography; yet a year later Mann would embark on another epic of similar size, El Cid. The dismissal (or resignation) of Mann is mysterious since the opening sequences, filmed at Death Valley, Nevada, set the style for the rest of the movie.Thirty-year-old Stanley Kubrick was hired to take over. He had already directed four productions (including Paths of Glory, also starring Douglas), but only two had been feature-length films. Spartacus was a bigger project by far, with a budget of $12 million and a cast of 10,500, a daunting project for such a young director (although his contract did not give him complete control over the filming). Cinematographer Russell Metty complained about Kubrick's unusually precise and detailed instructions for the film's camerawork. But Metty remained on the production and later won the Oscar for Best Cinematography, Color for the film.Spartacus was filmed using the 35 mm Technirama format and then blown up to 70 mm film. This was a change for Kubrick, who preferred using square-format ratios. Kubrick found working outdoors or in real locations to be distracting and thus preferred to film in the studio. He believed the actors would benefit more from working on a sound stage, where they could fully concentrate. To create the illusion of the large crowds that play such an essential role in the film, Kubrick's crew used three-channel sound equipment to record 76,000 spectators at a Michigan State Notre Dame college football game shouting "Hail, Crassus!" and "I'm Spartacus!"The intimate scenes were filmed in Hollywood, but Kubrick insisted that all battle scenes be filmed on a vast plain outside Madrid. Eight thousand trained soldiers from the Spanish infantry were used to double as the Roman army. Kubrick directed the armies from the top of specially constructed towers. However, he eventually had to cut all but one of the gory battle scenes, due to negative audience reactions at preview screenings.The original score for Spartacus was composed and conducted by six-time Academy Award nominee Alex North. It was nominated by the American Film Institute for their list of greatest film scores. It is a textbook example of how modernist compositional styles can be adapted to the Hollywood leitmotif technique. North's score is epic, as befits the scale of the film. After extensive research of music of that period, North gathered a collection of antique instruments that, while not authentically Roman, provided a strong dramatic effect. These instruments included a sarrusophone, Israeli recorder, Chinese oboe, lute, mandolin, Yugoslav flute, kythara, dulcimer, and bagpipes. North's prize instrument was the ondioline, similar to an earlier version of the electronic synthesizer, which had never been used in film before. Much of the music is written without a tonal center, or flirts with tonality in ways that most film composers would not risk. One theme is used to represent both slavery and freedom, but is given different values in different scenes, so that it sounds like different themes. The love theme for Spartacus and Varinia is the most accessible theme in the film, and there is a harsh trumpet figure for Crassus.The soundtrack album runs less than forty-five minutes and is not very representative of the score. There were plans to re-record a significant amount of the music with North's friend and fellow film composer Jerry Goldsmith, but the project kept getting delayed. Goldsmith died in 2004. Numerous bootleg recordings have been made, but none has good sound quality.In 2010 the soundtrack was re-released as part of a set, featuring 6 CDs, 1 DVD, and a 168-page booklet. This is a limited edition of 5,000 copies.[6]The film parallels 1950s American history with the McCarthy Hearings as well as the civil rights movement. The McCarthy Hearings, which demanded witnesses to "name names" of supposed communist sympathizers, closely resembles the final scene when the slaves, asked by Crassus to give up their leader by pointing him out from the multitude, each stand up to proclaim, "I am Spartacus". Howard Fast, who wrote the book on which the film was based, "was jailed for his refusal to testify, and wrote the novel Spartacus while in prison.[7] The comment of how slavery was a central part of American history is pointed to in the beginning in the scenes featuring Draba and Spartacus. Draba, who denies the friendship of Spartacus claiming "gladiators can have no friends", sacrifices himself by attacking Crassus rather than kill Spartacus. This scene points to the fact that Americans are indebted to the suffering of African Americans who played a major role in building the country. The fight to end segregation and to promote the equality of African Americans is seen in the mixing of races within the gladiator school as well as in the army of Spartacus where all fight for freedom.[8] Another instance of the film's allusions to the political climate of the United States is hinted to in the beginning where Rome is described as a republic "that lay fatally stricken with a disease called human slavery," and describing Spartacus as a "proud, rebellious son dreaming of the death of slavery, 2000 years before it finally would die"; thus the ethical and political vision of the film is first introduced as a foreground for the ensuing action.[9]The voice-over at the beginning of the film also depicts Rome as destined to fail by the inevitable rise of Christianity and the "enlightenment" it would bring: "In the last century before the birth of the new faith called Christianity which was destined to overthrow the pagan tyranny of Rome and bring about a new society, the Roman Republic stood at the very centre of the civilised world . . . Even at the zenith of her pride and power, the Republic lay fatally stricken with the disease called human slavery. The age of the dictator was at hand, waiting in the shadows for the event to bring forth. In that same century, in the conquered Greek province of Thrace, an illiterate slave woman added to her master's wealth by giving birth to a son whom she names Spartacus. A proud rebellious son, who was sold to living death in the mines of Libya, before his thirteenth birthday. There under whip and chain and sun he lived out his youth and his young manhood, dreaming the death of slavery 2000 years before it finally would die."Thus Rome is portrayed as the oppressor suffering from its own excesses, where the prospect of Christian salvation is offered as the means to end Roman oppression and slavery. [10]The film's release occasioned both applause from the mainstream media and protests from anti-communist groups such as the National Legion of Decency who picketed theaters showcasing the film. To affirm the film's "legitimacy as an expression of national aspirations wasnt stilled until the newly elected John F. Kennedy crossed a picket line set up by anti-communist organizers to attend the film.[7]The film was re-released in 1967 (in a version 23 minutes shorter than the original release), and again in 1991 with the same 23 minutes restored by Robert A. Harris, plus an additional 14 minutes that had been cut from the film before its original release. This addition includes several violent battle sequences. It also has a bath scene in which the Roman patrician and general Crassus (Olivier) attempts to seduce his slave Antoninus (Curtis), speaking about the analogy of "eating oysters" and "eating snails" to express his opinion that sexual preference is a matter of taste rather than morality.When the film was restored (two years after Olivier's death), the original dialogue recording of this scene was missing; it had to be re-dubbed. Tony Curtis, by then 66, was able to re-record his part, but Crassus' voice was an impersonation of Olivier by the actor Anthony Hopkins. A talented mimic, he had been a protege of Olivier during his days as the National Theatre's Artistic Director and knew his voice well.Some four minutes of the film are lost, due to Universal's mishandling of its film prints in the 1970s. These scenes relate to the character of Gracchus (Laughton), including a scene where he commits suicide. The audio tracks of these scenes have survived. They are included on the Criterion Collection DVD, alongside production stills of some of the lost footage.Spartacus has been on 5 different AFI 100 Years... lists including #62 for thrills, #22 for heroes, #44 for cheers and #81 for overall movies.In June 2008, AFI revealed its "10 Top 10"the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genresafter polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. Spartacus was acknowledged as the fifth best film in the epic genre.[12][13]The movie received mixed reviews when first released, but over time its reputation has gained in stature. Critics such as Roger Ebert have argued that the film has flaws, though his review is generally positive otherwise.[16] When released, the movie was attacked by both the American Legion and the Hollywood columnist Hedda Hopper because of its connection with Trumbo. Hopper stated, "The story was sold to Universal from a book written by a commie and the screen script was written by a commie, so don't go to see it."[1]Bosley Crowther called it a "spotty, uneven drama."[17] It has a 96% (fresh) rating on Rotten Tomatoes.[18]In the climactic scene, recaptured slaves are asked to identify Spartacus in exchange for leniency; instead, each slave proclaims himself to be Spartacus, thus sharing his fate. The documentary Trumbo[4][verification needed] suggests that this scene was meant to dramatize the solidarity of those accused of being Communist sympathizers during the McCarthy Era who refused to implicate others, and thus were blacklisted.Regarding this scene, an in-joke is used in Kubrick's next film, Lolita (1962), where Humbert Humbert asks Clare Quilty, "Are you Quilty?" to which he replies, "No, I'm Spartacus. Have you come to free the slaves or something?"[19] Many subsequent films, television shows and advertisements have referenced or parodied the iconic scene. One of the most notable is the 1979 film Monty Python's Life of Brian, which reverses the situation by depicting an entire group undergoing crucifixion all claiming to be Brian, who it has just been announced is eligible for release ("I'm Brian"; "No, I'm Brian"; "I'm Brian and so's my wife.")[19] Further examples have been documented[19] in David Hughes' The Complete Kubrick[20] and Jon Solomon's The Ancient World in Cinema.[21]October 7, 1960(1960-10-07)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Screenplay development
3.2 Filming
3.3 Music
3.4 Political commentary, Christianity, and reception

3.1 Screenplay development3.2 Filming3.3 Music3.4 Political commentary, Christianity, and reception4 Re-releases and restoration5 Awards and nominations

5.1 Academy Awards

5.1 Academy Awards6 Critical reception7 "I'm Spartacus!"8 See also9 References10 External links3.1 Screenplay development3.2 Filming3.3 Music3.4 Political commentary, Christianity, and reception5.1 Academy AwardsKirk Douglas as SpartacusLaurence Olivier as CrassusJean Simmons as VariniaCharles Laughton as GracchusPeter Ustinov as BatiatusTony Curtis as AntoninusJohn Gavin as Julius CaesarJohn Dall as Marcus GlabrusNina Foch as Helena GlabrusJohn Ireland as CrixusHerbert Lom as Tigranes Levantus (pirate envoy)Charles McGraw as MarcellusWoody Strode as DrabaAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies Nominated[14]AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills #62AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Spartacus #22 Hero

Spartacus #22 HeroAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"I'm Spartacus! I'm Spartacus!" Nominated[15]

"I'm Spartacus! I'm Spartacus!" Nominated[15]AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) #81AFI's 10 Top 10 #5 Epic filmSpartacus #22 Hero"I'm Spartacus! I'm Spartacus!" Nominated[15]1st century BCList of films set in ancient RomeList of historical drama filmsSpartacus at the Internet Movie DatabaseSpartacus at AllRoviSpartacus at Rotten TomatoesCriterion Collection essay by Stephen FarberRare, Never-Seen: 'Spartacus' at 50 at LIFEGiant is a 1956 American drama film, directed by George Stevens from a screenplay adapted by Fred Guiol and Ivan Moffat from the novel by Edna Ferber. The film stars Elizabeth Taylor, Rock Hudson and James Dean and features Carroll Baker, Jane Withers, Chill Wills, Mercedes McCambridge, Dennis Hopper, Sal Mineo, Rod Taylor, Elsa Cardenas and Earl Holliman. Giant was the last of James Dean's three films as a leading actor, and earned him his second and last Academy Award nomination  he was killed in a car accident before the film was released. Nick Adams was called in to do some voice-over dubbing for Dean's role.In 2005, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".Jordan "Bick" Benedict (Rock Hudson), the head of the rich Benedict ranching family of Texas, goes to Maryland to buy a stud horse, War Winds. There he meets and courts the socialite Leslie Lynnton (Elizabeth Taylor), who breaks off her engagement to a diplomat (Rod Taylor) and becomes Bick's wife.They return to Texas to start their life together on the family ranch, Reata, where Bick's sister Luz (Mercedes McCambridge) runs the household. Luz resents Leslie's arrival and tries to intimidate her. Jett Rink (James Dean) works for Luz and hopes to find his fortune by leaving Texas; he also has a secret love for Leslie. Luz expresses her hostility for Leslie by cruelly digging in her spurs while riding Leslie's beloved horse, War Winds. Luz dies after War Winds bucks her off, and as part of her will, Jett is given a plot of land within the Benedict ranch. Bick tries to buy back the land, but Jett refuses. Jett keeps the fenced off waterhole as his home and names the property Little Reata. Leslie eventually gives birth to twins, Jordan "Jordy" Benedict III (Dennis Hopper) and Judy Benedict (Fran Bennett), and a younger daughter named Luz II (Carroll Baker).Jett discovers traces of oil in a footprint left by Leslie and he drills in the spot. He hits his first gusher and is covered in the spouting oil. He drives to the Benedict front yard to assert himself and proclaim to the family and guests that he will be richer than the Benedicts. After Jett makes a rude sexual remark to Leslie, Bick punches him. As Bick's friends restrain him, Jett hits him several times, then drives off. In the years before World War II, Jett prospers through his oil drilling company, named 'Jetexas'. Determined to remain a cattle rancher like his forefathers, Bick rejects several offers to drill for oil on his much larger ranch.Meanwhile, tensions in the Benedict household revolve around how the parents want to bring up their children. Bick insists that Jordy must succeed him and run the ranch, as his father and grandfather before him  but Jordy wants to be a doctor. Leslie wants Judy to attend finishing school in Switzerland, but Judy loves the ranch and wants to study animal husbandry at Texas Tech. Both children succeed in pursuing their chosen vocations. After war breaks out, Jett visits the Benedicts to persuade Bick to allow oil production on his land to help the war effort. Recognizing that his children will not take over the ranch when he retires, Bick concedes. Both Bick and Jett have developed drinking problems. Luz II, now in her teens, starts flirting with Jett. Once oil production starts on the ranch, the wealthy Benedict family becomes even wealthier, as suggested by the addition of a swimming pool next to the house.After the war, the Benedict-Rink rivalry continues, coming to a head when the Benedicts discover that Luz II and the much older Jett have been dating. At a huge gala Jett organizes in his own honor, an irate Jordy tries to fight him after his Mexican-American wife, Juana (Elsa Crdenas), is repeatedly insulted by Jett's employees because of her race. As his goons hold Jordy, Jett punches him repeatedly in front of a crowd, and has the young man thrown out. Fed up, Bick challenges Jett to a fistfight. Drunk and almost incoherent, Jett leads the way to a wine storage room. Seeing that Jett is in no state to defend himself, Bick lowers his fists, says "You're not even worth hitting. ... You're all through," and leaves, but not before toppling Jett's wine cellar shelves, domino-style. Jett, completely drunk, collapses face down and falls asleep on the table in front of his seat of honor. All the guests leave. Later, Luz II sees him partly recovered from his stupor, talking to an empty room and disclosing that his sexual interest in the young girl is only his attempt to possess her mother symbolically.The next day, the Benedicts, all except Jordy, drive down a sparsely traveled road and stop at a segregated diner. Juana and her little boy are once again insulted racially, and when the proprietor, Sarge (Mickey Simpson), insults and begins to physically eject an old Mexican man and his family, Bick tries to stop him. This leads to a fistfight, which Bick clearly loses. Juana, Leslie and Luz II are disgusted by Sarge's bigotry, but proud of Bick for standing up to the bully.Back at the ranch, Bick and Leslie watch their grandchildren, blonde and Latino, and reflect on their life and family. Leslie tells Bick that after watching him lose the fight in the diner, she respects his evolution in understanding the concerns of people not like his wealthy forbears, and considers their own incarnation of the Benedict family a success.The movie is an epic portrayal of a powerful Texas ranching family challenged by changing times and the coming of big oil.[2] A major subplot concerns the racism of white Texans and the social segregation of Mexican Americans they enforce. In early segments of the film, Bick and Luz treat the Mexicans who work on their ranch condescendingly, which upsets the more socially conscious Leslie. Bick eventually comes to realize the moral indefensibility of his racismin a climactic scene at a roadside diner he loses a fistfight to the racist owner, but earns Leslie's respect for defending the human rights of his brown-skinned daughter-in-law and grandson. Another subplot involves Leslie's own striving for women's equal rights as she defies the patriarchal social order, asserting herself and expressing her own opinions when the men talk. She protests being expected to suppress her beliefs in deference to Bick's; this conflict leads to their temporary separation.[3]The first part of the picture was shot in Albemarle County, Virginia, doubling for Maryland, and utilizing the Belmont estate near the Keswick railroad station, which depicted the "Ardmore, Maryland" railway depot.[4] The film begins with Jordan "Bick" Benedict, played by Hudson, arriving at Ardmore to purchase a stallion from the Lynnton family.Much of the subsequent film, depicting "Reata", the Benedict ranch, was shot in and around the town of Marfa, Texas, and the remote, dry plains found nearby, with interiors filmed at the Warner Brothers studios in Burbank, California. The "Jett Rink Day" parade and airport festivities were filmed at the nearby Burbank Airport.The fictional character Jett Rink was inspired partly by the extraordinary rags-to-riches life of the wildcatter oil tycoon Glenn Herbert McCarthy (19071988). Author Edna Ferber met McCarthy when she booked a room at his Shamrock Hotel (known as the Shamrock Hilton after 1955) in Houston, Texas, on which the fictional Emperador Hotel was based in the book and the film.Australian actor Rod Taylor was cast after being seen in an episode of Studio 57, The Black Sheep's Daughter. It was one of his first Hollywood roles.[5]Giant premiered in New York City on October 10, 1956,[6] with the local DuMont station, WABD, televising the arrival of cast and crew, as well as other celebrities and studio chief Jack Warner[citation needed]; it was released to nationwide distribution on November 24, 1956.[6]Capitol Records, which had issued some of Dimitri Tiomkin's music from the soundtrack (with the composer conducting the Warner Brothers studio orchestra) on an LP, later digitally remastered the tracks and issued them on CD, including two tracks conducted by Ray Heindorf. Both versions used a monaural blend of the multi-channel soundtrack recording.[citation needed]Stevens gave Hudson a choice between Elizabeth Taylor and Grace Kelly to play his leading lady, Leslie. Hudson chose Taylor.[7]Giant was Barbara Barrie's first film. Carroll Baker, who plays Elizabeth Taylor's daughter, was older in real life than her screen mother.After James Dean's death late in production, Nick Adams overdubbed some of Dean's lines, which were nearly inaudible, as Rink's voice.[8] George Stevens had a reputation as a meticulous film editor, and the film spent an entire year in the editing room.[9]Giant won praise from both critics and the public, and according to the Texan author, Larry McMurtry, was especially popular with Texans, even though it was sharply critical of Texan society.[2] Bosley Crowther of the New York Times wrote that "[George Stevens] takes three hours and seventeen minutes to put his story across. That's a heap of time to go on about Texas, but Mr. Stevens has made a heap of film." and 'Giant', for all its complexity, is a strong contender for the year's top-film award."[10]Variety's "Hift" claimed that Giant was "for the most part, an excellent film which registers strongly on all levels, whether it's in its breathtaking panoramic shots of the dusty Texas plains; the personal, dramatic impact of the story itself, or the resounding message it has to impart."[11]The film received a 97% positive rating on the film-critics aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes.[12] TV Guide gave the film its maximum of four stars, saying of James Dean's performance "This was the last role in Dean's all-too-brief career  he was dead when the film was released  and his presence ran away with the film. He performs his role in the overwrought method manner of the era, and the rest of the cast seems to be split between awe of his talent and disgust over his indulgence."[13]Giant won the Academy Award for Best Director and was nominated nine other times, twice for Best Actor in a Leading Role (James Dean and Rock Hudson). The other nominations came in the categories of Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Mercedes McCambridge); Best Art Direction-Set Decoration, Color (Boris Leven, Ralph S. Hurst); Best Costume Design, Color; Best Film Editing; Best Music, Scoring of a Dramatic or Comedy Picture; Best Picture; and Best Writing, Best Screenplay - Adapted.[14]American Film Institute recognitionOctober 10, 1956(1956-10-10)1 Plot2 Cast3 Themes4 Production5 Release6 Reception7 Accolades

7.1 Academy Awards
7.2 Other honors

7.1 Academy Awards7.2 Other honors8 References9 External links7.1 Academy Awards7.2 Other honorsElizabeth Taylor as Leslie Lynnton BenedictRock Hudson as Jordan "Bick" Benedict Jr.James Dean as Jett Rink

Nick Adams recorded some of the character's dialogue after Dean's death.

Nick Adams recorded some of the character's dialogue after Dean's death.Jane Withers as Vashti Snythe, Leslie's best friendRobert Nichols as Mort "Pinky" Snythe, Vashti's husbandChill Wills as Uncle Bawley, Bick's uncleMercedes McCambridge as Luz Benedict, Bick's sisterCarroll Baker as Luz Benedict II, Leslie and Bick's daughterDennis Hopper as Jordan Benedict III, Leslie and Bick's sonFran Bennett as Judy Benedict, Leslie and Bick's daughterEarl Holliman as Robert "Bob" Dace, Luz II's husbandElsa Crdenas as Juana Guerra Benedict, Jordan III's wifePaul Fix as Dr. Horace Lynnton, Leslie's fatherJudith Evelyn as Mrs. Nancy Lynnton, Leslie's motherCarolyn Craig as Lacey Lynnton, Leslie's sisterRod Taylor as Sir David Karfrey, Lacey's husbandSal Mineo as Angel Obregn IICharles Watts as Judge Oliver WhitesideMaurice Jara as Dr. GuerraAlexander Scourby as Old PoloMickey Simpson as Sarge, owner of Sarge's DinerNick Adams recorded some of the character's dialogue after Dean's death.AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #82Giant (1956 film) at the Internet Movie DatabaseGiant (1956 film) at the TCM Movie DatabaseGiant (1956 film) at AllRoviGiant (1956 film) at Box Office MojoGiant at Rotten TomatoesSunrise: A Song of Two Humans, also known as Sunrise, is a 1927 American silent film directed by German film director F. W. Murnau. The story was adapted by Carl Mayer from the short story "Die Reise nach Tilsit" ("A Trip to Tilsit"[1][2]) by Hermann Sudermann.Sunrise won an Academy Award for Unique and Artistic Production at the first Academy Awards ceremony in 1929 and sixty years later was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry of the United States Library of Congress for films that are "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."[3] The 10th anniversary update of the American Film Institute's best 100 films in 2007 placed it #82,[4] while the decennial Sight and Sound poll of 2012 for the British Film Institute named it the fifth-best film in the history of motion pictures by critics, and 22nd by directors. [5]Murnau chose the new Fox Movietone sound-on-film system, so it is one of the first with a soundtrack of music and sound effects.[citation needed] Although the original negative was destroyed in a nitrate fire in 1937, a new negative was created from a surviving print.[6]A vacationing Woman from the City (Margaret Livingston) lingers in a lakeside town for weeks. After dark, she goes to a farmhouse where the Man (George O'Brien) and the Wife (Janet Gaynor) live with their child. She whistles from the fence outside. The Man is torn, but finally departs, leaving his wife with the memories of better times when they were deeply in love.The man and woman meet in the moonlight and kiss passionately. She wants him to sell his farm -- which hasn't done well recently -- to join her in the city. When she suggests that he solve the problem of his wife by drowning her, he throttles her violently, but even that dissolves in a passionate embrace. The Woman gathers bundles of reeds so that when the boat is overturned, the Man can stay afloat.The Wife suspects nothing when her husband suggests going on an outing, but when they set off across the lake, she soon grows suspicious. He prepares to throw her overboard, but realizes he cannot do it. He rows frantically for shore, and when the boat reaches land, she flees.She boards a trolley, and he follows, begging her not to be afraid of him. The trolley brings them to the city. Her fear and disappointment are overwhelming. He plies her with flowers and cakes and finally she stops crying and accepts his gifts. Emerging back on the street, they are touched to see a bride enter a church for her processional, and follow her inside to watch the wedding. The Man breaks down and asks her to forgive him. After a tearful reconciliation, they continue their adventure in the city. As darkness falls, they board the trolley for home.Soon they are drifting back across the lake under the moonlight. A sudden storm causes their boat to begin sinking. The Man remembers the two bundles of reeds he placed in the boat earlier and ties the bundles around the Wife. The boat capsizes, and the Man awakes on a rocky shore. He gathers the townspeople to search the lake, but all they find is a broken bundle of reeds floating in the water.Convinced the Wife has drowned, the grief-stricken Man stumbles home. The Woman From the City goes to his house, assuming their plan has succeeded. The Man begins to choke her. Then the Maid calls to him that his wife is alive, so he releases the Woman and runs to the Wife, who survived by clinging to one last bundle of reeds.The Man kneels by the Wife's bed as she slowly opens her eyes. The Man and the Wife kiss, while the Woman From the City's carriage rolls down the hill toward the lake, and the film dissolves to the sunrise.Sunrise was made by F. W. Murnau, a German director who was one of the leading figures in German Expressionism, a style that uses distorted art design for symbolic effect. Murnau was invited by William Fox to make an Expressionist film in Hollywood.The resulting film features enormous stylized sets that create an exaggerated, fairy-tale world; the city street set alone reportedly cost over US$200,000 to build and was re-used in many subsequent Fox productions including John Ford's Four Sons (1928).[7] Much of the exterior shooting was done at Lake Arrowhead, California.Full of cinematic innovations, some have called it the Citizen Kane of American silent cinema.[citation needed] The groundbreaking cinematography (by Charles Rosher and Karl Struss) featured particularly impressive tracking shots that influenced later filmmakers,[citation needed] including the longest continuous tracking shot made up to that point: over four minutes in one take. Titles appear sparingly, with long sequences of pure action and the bulk of the story told in Murnau's signature style. The extensive use of forced perspective is striking, particularly in a shot of the City with normal-sized people and sets in the foreground and smaller figures in the background by much smaller sets.The characters go unnamed, lending them a universality conducive to symbolism.[8] Veit Harlan compared his German remake Die Reise nach Tilsit (1939), pointing to the symbolism and soft focus of Sunrise he claimed that it was a poem, whereas his realistic Die Reise nach Tilsit was a film.[9]Mordaunt Hall of The New York Times highly praised the film calling it "A Film Masterpiece."[10] Time said it was a "meagre story" and "manages to remain picturesquely soporific for a long evening."[11]Academy Award wins (1929)[12]Academy Award nominations (1929)Other distinctions20th Century Fox originally released Sunrise on DVD in Region 1, but only as a special, limited edition available only by mailing in proofs-of-purchase for other DVD titles in their 20th Century Fox Studio Classics line, or as part of the box set Studio Classics: The 'Best Picture' Collection. Individual copies of this DVD can frequently be found on eBay. The DVD includes commentary, a copy of the film's trailer, details about Murnau's lost film Four Devils, outtakes and a great many more features.In late 2008, Fox released the "Murnau, Borzage and Fox Box Set" in some markets. Both Movietone and European silent versions of "Sunrise" are included. A documentary of the three individuals is also part of the collection.Sunrise has also been released on DVD in the UK as part of the Masters of Cinema series. In September 2009, Masters of Cinema released a 2-disc DVD reissue, containing both the Movietone version and the shorter Czech print found on the 2008 "Murnau, Borzage and Fox" DVD, as well as the extra features found on the previous Masters of Cinema DVD release and the Fox Studio Classics release. The film was released simultaneously on Blu-ray Disc,[14] with both versions of the feature rendered in 1080p High-definition video, and both the stereo and the mono soundtracks rendered in Dolby TrueHD lossless audio. This UK release was the first occasion of a silent film being released on Blu-ray. The Blu-ray disk is apparently not region-encoded, and thus should be viewable on any Blu-ray disk player.[15]September 23, 1927(1927-09-23)1 Plot2 Cast3 Style4 Reception

4.1 Awards and nominations

4.1 Awards and nominations5 DVD and Blu-ray releases6 References7 External links4.1 Awards and nominationsGeorge O'Brien as The ManJanet Gaynor as The WifeMargaret Livingston as The Woman From the CityBodil Rosing as The MaidJ. Farrell MacDonald as The PhotographerRalph Sipperly as The BarberJane Winton as The Manicure GirlArthur Housman as The Obtrusive GentlemanEddie Boland as The Obliging GentlemanBest Actress in a Leading Role - Janet Gaynor (at this time acting awards were given for an actor's entire body of work in a year, so the award was for her work on this film, Seventh Heaven, and Street Angel)Best Cinematography - Charles Rosher and Karl StrussBest Unique and Artistic Production (This category was akin to best picture, and was only awarded at the 1st Academy Awards alongside "Outstanding Picture, Production")[13]Best Art Direction - Rochus Gliese.In 1989- National Film Registry.Top 10 of the Sight and Sound critic's poll for best film ever made in 2002 & 2012.AFI's 100 Years100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #82American Film Institute's 100 Passions list.Sunrise: A Song of Two Humans at the Internet Movie DatabaseSunrise: A Song of Two Humans at AllRoviRoger Ebert's Great Movie essay on Sunrise.Village Voice essay.Murnau, Borzage & Fox at 20th Century Fox Studio Classics.Sunrise: A Song of Two Humans (1927) at YouTube, in nine parts. 1, 2, 3, 4,5, 6, 7, 8, 9.Platoon is a 1986 American war film written and directed by Oliver Stone and stars Tom Berenger, Willem Dafoe and Charlie Sheen. It is the first of Stone's Vietnam War trilogy, followed by 1989's Born on the Fourth of July and 1993's Heaven & Earth.[2]Stone wrote the story based upon his experiences as a U.S. infantryman in Vietnam to counter the vision of the war portrayed in John Wayne's The Green Berets.[3] The film won the Academy Award for Best Picture of 1986. In 2007, the American Film Institute placed Platoon at #83 in their "AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies" poll. British television channel Channel 4 voted Platoon as the 6th greatest war film ever made, behind Full Metal Jacket and ahead of A Bridge Too Far.[4]In 1967, Chris Taylor (Charlie Sheen) has dropped out of college and volunteered for combat duty in Vietnam. Assigned to Bravo Company, near the Cambodian border, he is worn down by the exhausting conditions and his enthusiasm for the war wanes. One night his unit is set upon by a group of North Vietnamese Army (NVA) soldiers, who retreat after a brief gunfight. New recruit Gardner is killed while another soldier, Tex, is maimed by friendly fire from a grenade thrown by Sergeant "Red" O'Neill (John C. McGinley), with Taylor being mistakenly reprimanded by the ruthless Staff Sergeant Bob Barnes (Tom Berenger). Taylor eventually gains acceptance from a tight-knit group in his unit who socialize and use drugs in a cabin clubhouse. He finds a mentor in Sergeant Elias (Willem Dafoe) as well as the elder King (Keith David).During one patrol, a soldier named Manny is found mutilated and tied to a post while two others, Sal and Sandy, are killed by a booby-trap. As tension mounts, the platoon soon reaches a nearby village where a supply cache is discovered. Taylor finds a disabled young man and an elderly woman hiding in a spider hole. Taylor snaps, screaming and threatening the man but is shocked to see Bunny (Kevin Dillon) then bludgeon him to death. Barnes interrogates the village chief to determine if they have been aiding the Vietcong. Despite the villagers' adamant denials, Barnes shoots and kills the chief's wife due to her persistent arguing. Barnes takes the child of the woman at gunpoint, threatening to shoot her if the villagers do not reveal information. Elias arrives, scolding Barnes and engaging in a scuffle with him over the incident. Platoon commander Lieutenant Wolfe (Mark Moses) orders the men to leave with the villagers and burn the village. As they leave, Taylor stops a group of soldiers raping two girls.Upon returning to base, Captain Harris (Dale Dye) warns that if he finds out an illegal killing took place, then a court-martial would be ordered, which concerns Barnes as Elias might give a testimony. On their next patrol, the platoon is ambushed and pinned down in a firefight, in which numerous soldiers are wounded. Wolfe calls in an artillery strike on incorrect coordinates, resulting in friendly fire casualties. Elias takes Taylor and Rhah (Francesco Quinn) to intercept flanking enemy troops. Barnes orders the rest of the platoon to retreat, and goes back into the jungle to find Elias' group. Barnes finds Elias and shoots him, returning to tell the others that Elias was killed by the enemy. After they take off, a wounded Elias emerges from the jungle, running from a group of North Vietnamese soldiers. Taylor glances over at Barnes and reads the apprehension on his face as Elias dies. At the base, Taylor attempts to talk his group into retaliation when a drunken Barnes enters the room and taunts them. Taylor attacks him but is cut near his eye as a result.The platoon is sent back into the combat area to maintain defensive positions. King is sent home and Taylor shares a foxhole with Francis (Corey Glover). That night, an NVA assault occurs and the defensive lines are broken. Several soldiers in the platoon including Junior, Bunny and Wolfe, are killed, while O'Neill barely escapes death by hiding under a dead soldier. To make matters worse, an NVA sapper armed with explosives rushes into battalion HQ, self-detonating and killing everyone inside. Meanwhile, Captain Harris orders his air support to expend all remaining ordnance inside his perimeter. During the chaos, Taylor encounters Barnes, but the wounded sergeant attacks him. Just before Barnes can pummel Taylor, both men are knocked unconscious by an explosion. Taylor regains consciousness the following morning, picks up an enemy Type 56, and finds an injured Barnes, who dares him to pull the trigger. Taylor shoots Barnes, killing him. Taylor then considers suicide with a grenade before reinforcements arrive and find him. Francis, who survived the battle unharmed, deliberately stabs himself in the leg and reminds Taylor that because they have been twice wounded, they can return home to the U.S. O'Neill, who desperately wants to go home, is told he will remain in duty and replace Barnes. The helicopter flies away and Taylor weeps as he stares down at the death and destruction.The following actors appeared in the film:[5](Official Cast list dated March 3, 1986 Platoon Productions N.V.)(** denotes military technical advisor 'ringers'[6])Additional cast:After his tour of duty in Vietnam ended in 1968, Oliver Stone wrote a screenplay called Break: a semi-autobiographical account detailing his experiences with his parents and his time in Vietnam. Stone's return from active duty in Vietnam resulted in a "big change" in how he viewed life and the war, and the unproduced screenplay Break was the result, and it eventually provided the basis for Platoon.[9]In a 2010 interview with the Times, Stone discussed his killing of a Viet Cong soldier and how he blended this experience into his screenplay.[10](subscription required) It featured several characters who were the seeds of those who would end up in Platoon. The script was set to music from The Doors; Stone sent the script to Jim Morrison in the hope he would play the lead (Morrison never responded but the script was returned to Oliver Stone by Morrison's manager shortly after Morrison's death - Morrison had the script with him when he died in Paris). Though Break went ultimately unproduced, it was the spur for him to attend film school.[9]After penning several other produced screenplays in the early 1970s, Stone came to work with Robert Bolt on an unproduced screenplay, The Cover-up. Bolt's rigorous approach rubbed off on Stone, and he was inspired to use the characters from his Break screenplay (who in turn were based upon people Stone knew in Vietnam) as the basis for a new screenplay titled The Platoon. Producer Martin Bregman attempted to elicit studio interest in the project, but Hollywood was still apathetic about Vietnam. However, the strength of Stone's writing on The Platoon was enough to get him the job penning Midnight Express in 1978. Despite that film's critical and commercial success, and that of other Stone-penned films at the time, most studios were still reluctant to finance The Platoon, as they feared a film about the Vietnam War would not attract an audience. After the release of The Deer Hunter and Apocalypse Now, they then cited the perception that these films were considered the pinnacle of the Vietnam War film genre as reasons not to make The Platoon.[9]Stone instead attempted to break into mainstream direction via the easier-to-finance horror genre, but The Hand failed at the box office, and Stone began to think that The Platoon would never be made. Stone wrote Year of the Dragon for a lower-than-usual fee of $200,000, on the condition from producer Dino De Laurentiis that he would then produce The Platoon. De Laurentiis secured financing for the film, but struggled to find a distributor. Because de Laurentiis had already spent money sending Stone to the Philippines to scout for locations, he decided to keep control of the film's script until he was repaid.[9] Then Stone's script for what would become Salvador was passed to John Daly of British production company Hemdale. Once again, this was a project that Stone had struggled to secure financing for, but Daly loved the script and was prepared to finance both Salvador and The Platoon off the back of it. Stone shot Salvador first, before turning his attention to what was by now called Platoon.[9]Platoon was filmed on the island of Luzon in the Philippines, starting in February 1986. The production of the film, on a scheduled date, was almost canceled because of the political upheaval in the country due to then-dictator Ferdinand Marcos, but with the help of well-known Asian producer Mark Hill, the shoot went on as scheduled. The shoot lasted 54 days and cost $6.5 million. The production made a deal with the Philippine military for the use of military equipment.[9] The film had real Vietnamese refugees acting in different roles in the film.[11] Filming was done chronologically.[12]James Woods, who had starred in Stone's previous film, Salvador, was offered a part in Platoon. He turned the role down, later saying he "couldn't face going into another jungle with [Stone]". Upon arrival in the Philippines, the cast was sent on a two-week intensive training course, during which they had to dig foxholes and were subject to forced marches and nighttime "ambushes" which utilized special-effects explosions. Stone explained that he was trying to break them down, "to mess with their heads so we could get that dog-tired, don't give a damn attitude, the anger, the irritation... the casual approach to death".[9] Willem Dafoe said "the training was very important to the making of the film," including its authenticity and the camaraderie developed among the cast. "By the time you got through the training and through the film, you had a relationship to the weapon. It wasnt going to kill people, but you felt comfortable with it."[13]Stone makes a cameo appearance as the battalion commander of 3/22 Infantry in the final battle. Dale Dye, who played Bravo company's commander Captain Harris, is a U.S. Marine Corps Vietnam veteran who also acted as the film's technical advisor.[3] Stone based the final attack on a real life battle he survived.Music used in the film includes Adagio for Strings by Samuel Barber, "White Rabbit" by Jefferson Airplane and "Okie From Muskogee" by Merle Haggard. During a scene in the "Underworld" the soldiers sing along to "The Tracks of My Tears" by Smokey Robinson and The Miracles, which also featured in the film's trailer.Critics both praised and criticized Platoon for its presentation of the violence seen in the war and the moral ambiguity created by the realities of guerrilla warfare, when unit leaders have to make a choice between saving the lives of their own men and taking those of suspected guerrilla sympathizers. Roger Ebert gave it four out of four stars, calling it the best film of the year, and the 9th best of the 1980s.The film currently has an 87% rating at Rotten Tomatoes and a Metacritic score of 86%.[14]American Film Institute ListsThe film was marketed with the tag line, "The first casualty of war is innocence," an adaptation of Senator Hiram Johnson's assertion in 1917 that "The first casualty of war is the truth."[18] (c.f. Aeschylus (BC 525 - BC 456), "In war, truth is the first casualty.") Several licensed tie-ins were released between 1986-1988. A video game was produced by Ocean Software for various formats. The Nintendo Entertainment System version was ported and published by Sunsoft. Loosely based on the film, the object of the game is to survive in the Vietnamese jungle against guerrilla attacks. A wargame was also produced, by Avalon Hill, as an introductory game to attract young people into the wargaming hobby.[19] A novelization of the film was written by Dale Dye. In 2002, Strategy First published and Digital Reality developed a real-time strategy game based on the film for Microsoft Windows.[20]December 19, 1986(1986-12-19)1 Plot2 Cast3 Development4 Production5 Soundtrack6 Reception7 Awards and nominations

7.1 Wins
7.2 Nominations

7.1 Wins7.2 Nominations8 Honors9 Marketing10 See also11 References12 External links7.1 Wins7.2 Nominations(1) Charlie Sheen as Chris Taylor(2) Tom Berenger as Sergeant Bob Barnes(3) Willem Dafoe as Sergeant Elias(4) Paul Sanchez as Doc(5) Bob Orwig as Gardner(6) Kevin Dillon as Bunny(7) Keith David as King(8) Andrew B. Clark as Tubbs**(9) Richard Edson as Sal(10) Corey Glover as Francis(11) Johnny Depp as Lerner(12) David Neidorf as Tex(13) Reggie Johnson as Junior(14) Forest Whitaker as Big Harold(15) Chris Pedersen as Crawford(16) James Terry McIlvain as Ace(17) John C. McGinley as Sergeant O'Neill(18) Tony Todd as Sergeant Warren(19) Mark Moses as Lieutenant Wolfe(20) Basile Achara as Flash(21) Francesco Quinn as Rhah(22) Ivan Kane as Tony Hoyt(23) Steve Barredo as Fu Sheng(24) Chris Castillejo as Rodriquez(25) Peter Hicks as Parker(26) Corkey Ford as Manny(27) Kevin Eshelman as Morehouse(29) Mark K. Ebenhoch as Ebenhoch** (original cast name "Adams". Character name changed on shooting day 26 by Stone because of his fascination with this unusual name)(28) Robert Galotti as Huffmeister**(30) J. Adam Glover as Sanderson(31) Dale Dye as Captain Harris(39) Clarisa Ortacio as Old Woman(41) Bernardo Manalili as Village Chief(40) Romy Sevilla as One-Legged Man(42) Than Rogers as Village Chief's Wife(43) Li Thi Van as Village Chief's Daughter(47)Matthew Westfall as Terrified Soldier(57) Nick Nickelson as 1st Mechanized Soldier(58) Warren McLean as 2nd Mechanized Soldier(59) Ron Barracks as Medic(48)Oliver Stone as 3/22 Infantry, Battalion Commander in Bunker (uncredited cameo)[7][8]Li Mai Thao as Rape Victim"Adagio for Strings" by Samuel Barber"Ride of the Valkyries" (in reference to Apocalypse Now, an earlier Vietnam War film that had Charlie Sheen's father, Martin Sheen, billed in the starring role)"Groovin'" by The Rascals"(Sittin' On) The Dock of the Bay" by Otis Redding"The Tracks of My Tears" by Smokey Robinson & The Miracles"White Rabbit" by Jefferson Airplane"Okie From Muskogee" by Merle HaggardAcademy Award for Best Picture[15]Academy Award for Best Director Oliver StoneAcademy Award for Best Sound (John Wilkinson, Richard Rogers, Charles Grenzbach, Simon Kaye)Academy Award for Best Film EditingBerlin International Film Festival - Silver Bear for Best Director[16]Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture - DramaGolden Globe Award for Best Director Oliver StoneGolden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor - Motion Picture Tom BerengerDirectors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing - Feature Film Oliver StoneBAFTA Award for Best Direction Oliver StoneBAFTA Award for Best EditingIndependent Spirit Award for Best FilmIndependent Spirit Award for Best Director Oliver StoneIndependent Spirit Award for Best Screenplay Oliver StoneIndependent Spirit Award for Best CinematographyAcademy Award for Best Supporting Actor Tom BerengerAcademy Award for Best Supporting Actor Willem DafoeAcademy Award for Best Original Screenplay Oliver StoneAcademy Award for Best Cinematography Robert RichardsonGolden Globe Award for Best Screenplay Oliver StoneBAFTA Award for Best Cinematography Robert RichardsonWriters Guild of America Award for Best Original Screenplay Oliver StoneIndependent Spirit Award for Best Male Lead Willem DafoeAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #83AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills - #72AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Sergeant Barnes - Nominated Villain[17]

Sergeant Barnes - Nominated Villain[17]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #86Sergeant Barnes - Nominated Villain[17]Vietnam War in filmPlatoon at the Internet Movie DatabasePlatoon at AllRoviPlatoon at Box Office MojoPlatoon at Rotten TomatoesEntertainment Weekly interview with StoneTitanic is a 1997 American epic romantic disaster film directed, written, co-produced, and co-edited by James Cameron. A fictionalized account of the sinking of the RMS Titanic, it stars Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet as members of different social classes who fall in love aboard the ship during its ill-fated maiden voyage.Cameron's inspiration for the film was predicated on his fascination with shipwrecks; he wanted to convey the emotional message of the tragedy, and felt that a love story interspersed with the human loss would be essential to achieving this. Production on the film began in 1995, when Cameron shot footage of the actual Titanic wreck. The modern scenes were shot on board the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh, which Cameron had used as a base when filming the wreck. A reconstruction of the Titanic was built at Playas de Rosarito, Baja California, and scale models and computer-generated imagery were also used to recreate the sinking. The film was partially funded by Paramount Pictures and 20th Century Fox, and, at the time, was the most expensive film ever made, with an estimated budget of $200million.Upon its release on December 19, 1997, the film achieved critical and commercial success. Nominated for fourteen Academy Awards, it won eleven, including the awards for Best Picture and Best Director, tying Ben Hur (1959) for most Oscars won by a single film. With an initial worldwide gross of over $1.84 billion, it was the first film to reach the billion-dollar mark. It remained the highest-grossing film of all time for twelve years, until Cameron's 2009 film Avatar surpassed its gross in 2010. A 3D version of the film, released on April 4, 2012 (often billed as Titanic 3D), to commemorate the centenary of the sinking of the ship, earned it an additional $343 million worldwide, which pushed Titanic's worldwide total to $2.18 billion. It became the second film to pass the two-billion mark (the first being Avatar).In 1996, treasure hunter Brock Lovett and his team explore the wreck of RMS Titanic, searching for a valuable diamond necklace called the Heart of the Ocean. They recover Caledon "Cal" Hockley's safe, believing the necklace to be inside, but instead find a sketch of a nude woman wearing it, dated April 14, 1912, the night the Titanic hit the iceberg. Hearing about the drawing, an elderly woman named Rose Dawson Calvert calls Lovett and claims that she is the woman depicted in the drawing. She and her granddaughter, Lizzy Calvert, visit him and his team on his salvage ship. When asked if she knows the whereabouts of the necklace, Rose recalls her time aboard the Titanic, revealing that she is Rose DeWitt Bukater, a passenger believed to have died in the sinking. She then begins her story as follows:In 1912, 17-year-old first class passenger Rose boards "Titanic" in Southampton with her fianc Cal and her mother Ruth DeWitt Bukater. Ruth stresses the importance of Rose's engagement, as the marriage would solve the DeWitt Bukaters' secret financial problems. Distraught by her engagement, Rose considers suicide by jumping off the ship's stern; a drifter and artist named Jack Dawson stops her. Discovered with Jack on the stern, Rose tells Cal that she was looking over the ship's edge in curiosity and that Jack saved her from falling. Pressed, Jack confirms her account. Cal is at first aloof to Jack, but when Rose indicates that recognition is due, he offers him a small amount of money. After Rose mocks Cal for this, asking if saving her life means so little, he invites Jack to a first-class dinner the following night. Jack and Rose develop a tentative friendship, even though Cal and Ruth are wary of the young third-class man. Following the dinner that night, Rose secretly joins Jack at a party in the ship's third-class quarter.Because Cal and Ruth forbid her to see Jack, Rose attempts to rebuff Jack's continuing advances. She soon realizes, though, that she prefers him over Cal, and meets him at the bow of the ship during what turns out to be the Titanic's final moments of daylight. They then go to Rose's stateroom, where she asks Jack to sketch her nude while wearing the Heart of the Ocean, Cal's engagement present to her. Afterward, the two evade Cal's bodyguard and make love inside a car in the ship's cargo hold. Going afterwards to the ship's forward well deck, they witness the ship's collision with an iceberg and overhear the ship's officers and designer outline its seriousness. Rose tells Jack that they should warn her mother and Cal.Cal discovers Jack's drawing and a mocking note from Rose in his safe along with the necklace. Furious, he has his bodyguard slip the necklace into Jack's coat pocket. Accused of stealing it, Jack is arrested, taken down to the Master-at-arms's office and handcuffed to a pipe. Cal puts the necklace in his coat. Rose runs away from Cal and her mother (who has boarded a lifeboat) and releases Jack. The ship then starts to launch flares in order to attract any nearby ships.Once Jack and Rose reach the deck, Cal and Jack persuade her to board another lifeboat, Cal claiming that he has arranged for himself and Jack to get off safely. After she boards, Cal tells Jack that the arrangement is only for himself. As Rose's boat lowers, she realizes that she cannot leave Jack, and jumps back on board the Titanic to reunite with him. Infuriated, Cal takes a pistol and chases them into the flooding first-class dining saloon. After exhausting his ammunition, Cal realizes to his chagrin that he gave his coat with the diamond to Rose. With the situation now dire, he returns to the boat deck and boards a lifeboat by pretending to look after a lost child.Jack and Rose return to the top deck. All lifeboats have departed and passengers are falling to their deaths as the stern rises out of the water. The ship breaks in half, and the stern side rises 90-degrees into the air. As it sinks, Jack and Rose ride the stern into the ocean. Jack helps Rose onto a wall panel only able to support one person's weight. Holding the panel's edge, he assures her she will die an old woman, warm in her bed. Meanwhile, Fifth Officer Harold Lowe has commandeered a lifeboat to search for survivors. Jack soon dies of hypothermia and Rose draws the attention of Lowe's boat, and is ultimately saved.Rose and the other survivors are taken by the RMS Carpathia to New York, where Rose gives her name as Rose Dawson. She hides from Cal on Carpathia's deck as he searches for her. She learns later that he committed suicide after losing his fortune in the Wall Street Crash of 1929.Her story complete, Rose goes alone to the stern of Lovett's ship. There she takes out the Heart of the Ocean, which has been in her possession all along, and drops it into the ocean. While seemingly asleep in her bed, the photos on her dresser are a visual chronicle that she lived a free life inspired by Jack. The young Rose is then seen reuniting with Jack at the Grand Staircase of the RMS Titanic, applauded and congratulated by those who perished on the ship.Although not - and not intended to be - an entirely historically accurate depiction of events,[19] the film does include dramatisations of various historical characters:Several crew members of the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh appear in the film, including Anatoly Sagalevich, creator and pilot of the Mir Deep Submergence Vehicle.[36] Anders Falk, who filmed a documentary about the film's sets for the Titanic Historical Society, cameoes in the film as a Swedish immigrant whom Jack Dawson meets when he enters his cabin. Ed and Karen Kamuda, then President and Vice President of the Society, were extras in the film.[37] James Cameron and Barry Dennen also cameo as praying men. Greg Ellis and Oliver Page both play cameo parts as a Carpathia Steward and Steward Barnes respectively.The boat seen alongside Titanic is the SS Nomadic, Titanic's tender ship which survives to this day.James Cameron had a fascination with shipwrecks, and, for him, the RMS Titanic was "the Mount Everest of shipwrecks."[39][40][41] He was almost past the point in his life when he felt he could consider an undersea expedition, but said he still had "a mental restlessness" to live the life he had turned away from when he switched from the sciences to the arts in college. So when an IMAX film was made from footage shot of the wreck itself, he decided to seek Hollywood funding to "pay for an expedition and do the same thing." It was "not because I particularly wanted to make the movie," Cameron said. "I wanted to dive to the shipwreck."[39]Cameron wrote a scriptment for a Titanic film,[42] met with 20th Century Fox executives including Peter Chernin, and pitched it as "Romeo and Juliet on the Titanic".[40][41] Cameron stated, "They were like, 'Oooooohkaaaaaay  a three-hour romantic epic? Sure, that's just what we want. Is there a little bit of Terminator in that? Any Harrier jets, shoot-outs, or car chases?' I said, 'No, no, no. It's not like that.'"[7] The studio was dubious about the idea's commercial prospects, but, hoping for a long term relationship with Cameron, they gave him a greenlight.[7][8][14]Cameron convinced Fox to promote the film based on the publicity afforded by shooting the Titanic wreck itself,[42] and organized several dives to the site over a period of two years.[38] "My pitch on that had to be a little more detailed," said Cameron. "So I said, 'Look, we've got to do this whole opening where they're exploring the Titanic and they find the diamond, so we're going to have all these shots of the ship." Cameron stated, "Now, we can either do them with elaborate models and motion control shots and CG and all that, which will cost X amount of money  or we can spend X plus 30 per cent and actually go shoot it at the real wreck."[40] The crew shot at the real wreck in the Atlantic Ocean eleven times in 1995 and actually spent more time with the ship than its passengers. At that depth, with a water pressure of 6,000 pounds per square inch, "one small flaw in the vessel's superstructure would mean instant death for all on board." Not only were the dives high-risk, but adverse conditions prevented Cameron from getting the high quality footage that he wanted.[8] During one dive, one of the submersibles collided with Titanic's hull, damaging both sub and ship and leaving fragments of the submersible's propeller shroud scattered around the superstructure. The external bulkhead of Captain Smith's quarters collapsed, exposing the interior. The area around the entrance to the Grand Staircase was also damaged.[43]Descending to the actual site made both Cameron and crew want "to live up to that level of reality.... But there was another level of reaction coming away from the real wreck, which was that it wasn't just a story, it wasn't just a drama," he said. "It was an event that happened to real people who really died. Working around the wreck for so much time, you get such a strong sense of the profound sadness and injustice of it, and the message of it." Cameron stated, "You think, 'There probably aren't going to be many filmmakers who go to Titanic. There may never be another one  maybe a documentarian." Due to this, he felt "a great mantle of responsibility to convey the emotional message of it  to do that part of it right, too".[14]After filming the underwater shots, Cameron began writing the screenplay.[42] He wanted to honor the people who died during the sinking, so he spent six months researching all of the Titanic's crew and passengers.[38] "I read everything I could. I created an extremely detailed timeline of the ship's few days and a very detailed timeline of the last night of its life," he said.[40] "And I worked within that to write the script, and I got some historical experts to analyze what I'd written and comment on it, and I adjusted it."[40] He paid meticulous attention to detail, even including a scene depicting the Californian's role in Titanic's demise, though this was later cut (see below). From the beginning of the shoot, they had "a very clear picture" of what happened on the ship that night. "I had a library that filled one whole wall of my writing office with "Titanic stuff," because I wanted it to be right, especially if we were going to dive to the ship," he said. "That set the bar higher in a way  it elevated the movie in a sense. We wanted this to be a definitive visualization of this moment in history as if you'd gone back in a time machine and shot it."[40]Cameron felt the Titanic sinking was "like a great novel that really happened", yet the event had become a mere morality tale; the film would give audiences the experience of living the history.[38] The treasure hunter Brock Lovett represented those who never connected with the human element of the tragedy,[36] while the blossoming romance of Jack and Rose, he believed, would be the most engaging part of the story: when their love is finally destroyed, the audience would mourn the loss.[38] "All my films are love stories," Cameron said, "but in Titanic I finally got the balance right. It's not a disaster film. It's a love story with a fastidious overlay of real history."[14] Cameron then framed the romance with the elderly Rose to make the intervening years palpable and poignant.[38] For him, the end of the film leaves open the question if the elderly Rose was in a conscious dream or had died in her sleep.[17]Harland and Wolff, the RMS Titanic's builders, opened their private archives to the crew, sharing blueprints that were thought lost. For the ship's interiors, production designer Peter Lamont's team looked for artifacts from the era. The newness of the ship meant every prop had to be made from scratch.[44] Fox acquired 40 acres of waterfront south of Playas de Rosarito in Mexico, and began building a new studio on May 31, 1996. A horizon tank of seventeen million gallons was built for the exterior of the reconstructed ship, providing 270 degrees of ocean view. The ship was built to full scale, but Lamont removed redundant sections on the superstructure and forward well deck for the ship to fit in the tank, with the remaining sections filled with digital models. The lifeboats and funnels were shrunk by ten percent. The boat deck and A-deck were working sets, but the rest of the ship was just steel plating. Within was a fifty-foot lifting platform for the ship to tilt during the sinking sequences. Towering above was a 162 feet (49m) tall tower crane on 600 feet (180m) of rail track, acting as a combined construction, lighting, and camera platform.[36]The sets representing the interior rooms of the Titanic were reproduced exactly as originally built, using photographs and plans from the Titanic's builders. "The liner's first class staircase, which figures prominently in the script was constructed out of real wood and actually destroyed in the filming of the sinking." The rooms, the carpeting, design and colors, individual pieces of furniture, decorations, chairs, wall paneling, cutlery and crockery with the White Star Line crest on each piece, completed ceilings, and costumes were among the designs true to the originals. Cameron additionally hired two Titanic historians, Don Lynch and Ken Marschall, to authenticate the historical detail in the film.[8]The modern day scenes of the expedition were shot on the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh in July 1996.[36] Principal photography for Titanic began in September 1996 at the newly-built Fox Baja Studios.[36] The poop deck was built on a hinge which could rise from zero to ninety degrees in a few seconds as the ship's stern rose during the sinking.[45] For the safety of the stuntmen, many props were made of foam rubber.[46] By November 15, the boarding scenes were being shot.[45] Cameron chose to build his RMS Titanic on the starboard side as a study of weather data showed prevailing north-to-south wind which blew the funnel smoke aft. This posed a problem for shooting the ship's departure from Southampton, as it was docked on its port side. Any writing on props and costumes had to be reversed, and if someone walked to their right in the script, they had to walk left during shooting. In post-production, the film was flipped to the correct direction.[47]A full-time etiquette coach was hired to instruct the cast on the manners of the upper class gentility in 1912.[8] Despite this, several critics picked up on anachronisms in the film, not least involving the two main stars.[48][49][50]Cameron sketched Jack's nude portrait of Rose for a scene which he feels has the backdrop of repression.[7] "You know what it means for her, the freedom she must be feeling. It's kind of exhilarating for that reason," he said.[14] The nude scene was DiCaprio and Winslet's first scene together. "It wasn't by any kind of design, although I couldn't have designed it better. There's a nervousness and an energy and a hesitance in them," Cameron stated. "They had rehearsed together, but they hadn't shot anything together. If I'd had a choice, I probably would have preferred to put it deeper into the body of the shoot." He said he and his crew "were just trying to find things to shoot" because the big set was not yet ready. "It wasn't ready for months, so we were scrambling around trying to fill in anything we could get to shoot." After seeing the scene on film, Cameron felt it worked out considerably well.[14]However, other times on the set were not as smooth. The shoot was an arduous experience that "cemented Cameron's formidable reputation as 'the scariest man in Hollywood'. He became known as an uncompromising, hard-charging perfectionist" and a "300-decibel screamer, a modern-day Captain Bligh with a megaphone and walkie-talkie, swooping down into people's faces on a 162ft crane".[51] Winslet chipped a bone in her elbow during filming, and had been worried that she would drown in the 17m-gallon water tank the ship was to be sunk in. "There were times when I was genuinely frightened of him. Jim has a temper like you wouldn't believe," she said.[51] "'God damn it!' he would yell at some poor crew member, 'that's exactly what I didn't want!'"[51] Her co-star, Bill Paxton, was familiar with Cameron's work ethic from his earlier experience with him. "There were a lot of people on the set. Jim is not one of those guys who has the time to win hearts and minds," he said.[51] The crew felt that Cameron had an evil alter ego, and nicknamed him "Mij" (Jim spelt backwards).[51] In response to the criticism, Cameron stated, "Film-making is war. A great battle between business and aesthetics."[51]During shooting on the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh, an angry crew member put the dissociative drug PCP into the soup that Cameron and various others ate one night, which sent more than 50 people to the hospital.[7] "There were people just rolling around, completely out of it. Some of them said they were seeing streaks and psychedelics," said actor Lewis Abernathy.[7] Cameron managed to vomit before the drug took a full hold. Abernathy was shocked at the way he looked. "One eye was completely red, like the Terminator eye. A pupil, no iris, beet red. The other eye looked like he'd been sniffing glue since he was four."[7][51] The person behind the poisoning was never caught.[15][52]The filming schedule was intended to last 138 days but grew to 160. Many cast members came down with colds, flu, or kidney infections after spending hours in cold water, including Winslet. In the end, she decided she would not work with Cameron again unless she earned "a lot of money".[52] Several others left and three stuntmen broke their bones, but the Screen Actors Guild decided, following an investigation, that nothing was inherently unsafe about the set.[52] Additionally, DiCaprio said there was no point when he felt he was in danger during filming.[53] Cameron believed in a passionate work ethic and never apologized for the way he ran his sets, although he acknowledged:I'm demanding, and I'm demanding on my crew. In terms of being kind of militaresque, I think there's an element of that in dealing with thousands of extras and big logistics and keeping people safe. I think you have to have a fairly strict methodology in dealing with a large number of people.[52]The costs of filming Titanic eventually began to mount, and finally reached $200million.[2][3][4] Fox executives panicked, and suggested an hour of specific cuts from the three-hour film. They argued the extended length would mean fewer showings, thus less money even though long epics are more likely to help directors win Oscars. Cameron refused, telling Fox, "You want to cut my movie? You're going to have to fire me! You want to fire me? You're going to have to kill me!" he said.[7] The executives did not want to start over, because it would mean the loss of their entire investment, but they also initially rejected Cameron's offer of forfeiting his share of the profits as an empty gesture; they felt that profits would be unlikely.[7] Cameron explained forfeiting his share as complex. "...the short version is that the film cost proportionally much more than T2 and True Lies. Those films went up seven or eight percent from the initial budget. Titanic also had a large budget to begin with, but it went up a lot more," said Cameron. "As the producer and director, I take responsibility for the studio that's writing the checks, so I made it less painful for them. I did that on two different occasions. They didn't force me to do it; they were glad that I did."[14]Cameron wanted to push the boundary of special effects with his film, and enlisted Digital Domain to continue the developments in digital technology which the director pioneered while working on The Abyss and Terminator 2: Judgment Day. Many previous films about the RMS Titanic shot water in slow motion, which did not look wholly convincing.[54] He encouraged them to shoot their 45-foot (14m) long miniature of the ship as if "we're making a commercial for the White Star Line".[55] Afterwards, digital water and smoke were added, as were extras captured on a motion capture stage. Visual effects supervisor Rob Legato scanned the faces of many actors, including himself and his children, for the digital extras and stuntmen. There was also a 65-foot (20m) long model of the ship's stern that could break in two repeatedly, the only miniature to be used in water.[54] For scenes set in the ship's engines, footage of the SS Jeremiah O'Brien's engines were composited with miniature support frames and actors shot against a greenscreen.[56] In order to save money, the first class lounge was a miniature set incorporated into a greenscreen backdrop.[57]An enclosed 5,000,000 US gallons (19,000,000l) tank was used for sinking interiors, in which the entire set could be tilted into the water. In order to sink the Grand Staircase, 90,000 US gallons (340,000l) of water were dumped into the set as it was lowered into the tank. Unexpectedly, the waterfall ripped the staircase from its steel-reinforced foundations, although no one was hurt. The 744-foot (227m) long exterior of the RMS Titanic had its first half lowered into the tank, but being the heaviest part of the ship meant it acted as a shock absorber against the water; to get the set into the water, Cameron had much of the set emptied and even smashed some of the promenade windows himself. After submerging the dining saloon, three days were spent shooting Lovett's ROV traversing the wreck in the present.[36] The post-sinking scenes in the freezing Atlantic were shot in a 350,000 US gallons (1,300,000l) tank,[58] where the frozen corpses were created by applying a powder on actors that crystallized when exposed to water, and wax was coated on hair and clothes.[44]The climactic scene, which features the breakup of the ship directly before it sinks, as well as its final plunge to the bottom of the Atlantic, involved a tilting full-sized set, 150 extras and 100 stunt performers. Cameron criticized previous Titanic films for depicting the final plunge of the liner as sliding gracefully underwater. He "wanted to depict it as the terrifyingly chaotic event that it really was".[8] When carrying out the sequence, people needed to fall off the increasingly tilting deck, plunging hundreds of feet below and bouncing off of railings and propellers on the way down. A few attempts to film this sequence with stunt people resulted in some minor injuries and Cameron halted the more dangerous stunts. The risks were eventually minimized "by using computer generated people for the dangerous falls".[8]There was one "crucial historical fact" Cameron chose to omit from the film  the ship that was close to the Titanic, but had turned off its radio for the night and did not hear their SOS calls. "Yes, the [SS] Californian. That wasn't a compromise to mainstream filmmaking. That was really more about emphasis, creating an emotional truth to the film," stated Cameron. He said there were aspects of retelling the sinking that seemed important in pre and post-production, but turned out to be less important as the film evolved. "The story of the Californian was in there; we even shot a scene of them switching off their Marconi radio set," said Cameron. "But I took it out. It was a clean cut, because it focuses you back onto that world. If Titanic is powerful as a metaphor, as a microcosm, for the end of the world in a sense, then that world must be self-contained."[14]During the first assembly cut, Cameron altered the planned ending, which had given resolution to Brock Lovett's story. In the original version of the ending, Brock and Lizzy see the elderly Rose at the stern of the boat, and fear she is going to commit suicide. Rose then reveals that she had the "Heart of the Ocean" diamond all along, but never sold it, in order to live on her own without Cal's money. She tells Brock that life is priceless and throws the diamond into the ocean, after allowing him to hold it. After accepting that treasure is worthless, Brock laughs at his stupidity. Rose then goes back to her cabin to sleep, whereupon the film ends in the same way as the final version. In the editing room, Cameron decided that by this point, the audience would no longer be interested in Brock Lovett and cut the resolution to his story, so that Rose is alone when she drops the diamond. He also did not want to disrupt the audience's melancholy after the Titanic's sinking.[59]The version used for the first test screening featured a fight between Jack and Lovejoy which takes place after Jack and Rose escape into the flooded dining saloon, but the test audiences disliked it.[60] The scene was written to give the film more suspense, and featured Cal (falsely) offering to give Lovejoy, his valet, the "Heart of the Ocean" if he can get it from Jack and Rose. Lovejoy goes after the pair in the sinking first class dining room. Just as they are about to escape him, Lovejoy notices Rose's hand slap the water as it slips off the table behind which she is hiding. In revenge for framing him for the "theft" of the necklace, Jack attacks him and smashes his head against a glass window, which explains the gash on Lovejoy's head that can be seen when he dies in the completed version of the film. In their reactions to the scene, test audiences said it would be unrealistic to risk one's life for wealth, and Cameron cut it for this reason, as well as for timing and pacing reasons. Many other scenes were cut for similar reasons.[60]The soundtrack album for Titanic was composed by James Horner. For the vocals heard throughout the film, subsequently described by Earle Hitchner of The Wall Street Journal as "evocative", Horner chose Norwegian singer Sissel Kyrkjeb, mononymously known as "Sissel". Horner knew Sissel from her album Innerst I Sjelen, and he particularly liked how she sang "Eg veit i himmerik ei borg" ("I Know in Heaven There Is a Castle"). He had tried twenty-five or thirty singers before he finally chose Sissel as the voice to create specific moods within the film.[61]Horner additionally wrote the song "My Heart Will Go On" in secret with Will Jennings because Cameron did not want any songs with singing in the film.[62] Cline Dion agreed to record a demo with the persuasion of her husband Ren Anglil. Horner waited until Cameron was in an appropriate mood before presenting him with the song. After playing it several times, Cameron declared his approval, although worried that he would have been criticized for "going commercial at the end of the movie".[62] Cameron also wanted to appease anxious studio executives and "saw that a hit song from his movie could only be a positive factor in guaranteeing its completion".[8]20th Century Fox and Paramount Pictures co-financed Titanic, with Paramount handling the North American distribution and Fox handling the international release. They expected Cameron to complete the film for a release on July 2, 1997. The film was to be released on this date "in order to exploit the lucrative summer season ticket sales when blockbuster films usually do better".[8] In April, Cameron said the film's special effects were too complicated and that releasing the film for summer would not be possible.[8] With production delays, Paramount pushed back the release date to December 19, 1997.[63] "This fueled speculation that the film itself was a disaster." However, a preview screening in Minneapolis on July 14 "generated positive reviews" and "[c]hatter on the internet was responsible for more favorable word of mouth about the [film]". This eventually led to more positive media coverage.[8]The film premiered on November 1, 1997, at the Tokyo International Film Festival,[64] where reaction was described as "tepid" by The New York Times.[65] However, positive reviews started to appear back in the United States; the official Hollywood premiere occurred on December 14, 1997, where "the big movie stars who attended the opening were enthusiastically gushing about the film to the world media".[8]Including revenue from the 2012 reissue, Titanic earned $658,672,302 in North America and $1,526,700,000 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $2,185,372,302.[5] It became the highest-grossing film of all time worldwide in 1998, and remained so for twelve years, until Avatar, also written and directed by Cameron, surpassed it in 2010.[66] On March 1, 1998,[67] it became the first film to earn more than $1billion worldwide,[68] and on the weekend April 1315, 2012a century after the original vessel's founderingTitanic became the second film to cross the $2billion threshold during its 3D re-release.[69] Box Office Mojo estimates that Titanic is the fifth highest-grossing film of all time in North America when adjusting for ticket price inflation.[70]The film received steady attendance after opening in North America on Friday, December 19, 1997. By the end of that same weekend, theaters were beginning to sell out. The film earned $8,658,814 on its opening day and $28,638,131 over the opening weekend from 2,674 theaters, averaging to about $10,710 per venue, and ranking number one at the box office, ahead of the eighteenth James Bond film, Tomorrow Never Dies. By New Year's Day, Titanic had made over $120million, had increased in popularity and theaters continued to sell out. Its biggest single day took place on Saturday, February 14 (Valentine's Day), 1998, making $13,048,711, more than six weeks after it debuted in North America.[71][72] It stayed at number one for fifteen consecutive weeks in North America, which remains a record for any film.[73] The film stayed in theaters in North America for almost ten months, before finally closing on Thursday, October 1, 1998 with a final domestic gross of $600,788,188.[74] Outside North America, the film made double its North American gross, generating $1,242,413,080[75] and accumulating a grand total of $1,843,201,268 worldwide from its initial theatrical run.[76]Before its release, various film critics predicted the film would be a significant disappointment at the box office, especially due to it being the most expensive film ever made at the time.[51][77][78][79] When it was shown to the press in autumn of 1997, "it was with massive forebodings" since the "people in charge of the screenings believed they were on the verge of losing their jobs  because of this great albatross of a picture on which, finally, two studios had to combine to share the great load of its making".[78] Cameron also thought he was "headed for disaster" at one point during filming. "We labored the last six months on Titanic in the absolute knowledge that the studio would lose $100m. It was a certainty," he stated.[51] As the film neared release, "particular venom was spat at Cameron for what was seen as his hubris and monumental extravagance". A film critic for the Los Angeles Times wrote that "Cameron's overweening pride has come close to capsizing this project" and that the film was "a hackneyed, completely derivative copy of old Hollywood romances".[51]When the film became a success, with an unprecedented box office performance, it was credited as "the love story [that] stole the world's hearts".[77] "The first batch of people to see it [were] gob smacked by the sheer scale and intimacy of the production. They emerged from the cinema, tear stained and emotionally flabbergasted."[79] The film was playing on 3,200 screens a full ten weeks after it opened,[78] and out of its fifteen straight weeks on top of the charts, jumped 43% in total sales in its ninth week of release. It earned over $20million a week for ten weeks,[80] and after fourteen weeks into its run, it was still bringing in more than $1m a week.[78] Although teenage girls, as well as young women in general, who would see the film several times and subsequently caused "Leo-Mania", were often credited with having primarily propelled the film to its all-time box office record,[81] other reports have attributed the film's success to "[p]ositive word of mouth and repeat viewership" due to the love story combined with the ground-breaking special effects.[80][82]The film's impact on men has also been especially credited.[79][83][84] Now considered one of the films that "make men cry",[83][84] MSNBC's Ian Hodder stated that men admire Jack's sense of adventure, stowing away on a steamship bound for America. "We cheer as he courts a girl who was out of his league. We admire how he suggests nude modeling as an excuse to get naked. So when [the tragic ending happens], an uncontrollable flood of tears sinks our composure," he said.[83] Titanic's ability to make men cry was briefly parodied in the 2009 film Zombieland, where character Tallahassee (Woody Harrelson), when recalling the death of his young son, states: "I haven't cried like that since Titanic."[85][86] Also addressing the sentimentality of the film, Benjamin Willcock of DVDActive.com said that, as a fourteen-year-old male, he had wanted to see Starship Troopers instead, but was overruled by an uncle and friends. "Little did I know that I would be seeing a film that would become the biggest, most successful motion picture event of all time," he stated. "I was also blissfully unaware that it would turn out to be so much more than 'some epic love story'".[79]In 2010, the BBC analyzed the stigma over men crying during Titanic and films in general. "Middle-aged men are not 'supposed' to cry during movies," stated Finlo Rohrer of the website, citing the ending of Titanic as having generated such tears, adding that "men, if they have felt weepy during [this film], have often tried to be surreptitious about it." Professor Mary Beth Oliver, of Penn State University, stated, "For many men, there is a great deal of pressure to avoid expression of 'female' emotions like sadness and fear. From a very young age, males are taught that it is inappropriate to cry, and these lessons are often accompanied by a great deal of ridicule when the lessons aren't followed." She said, "Indeed, some men who might sneer at the idea of crying during Titanic will readily admit to becoming choked up during Saving Private Ryan or Platoon." For men in general, the idea of sacrifice for a "brother" is a more suitable source of emotion.[84]Titanic's catchphrase "I'm the king of the world!" became one of the film industry's more popular quotations.[87][88] According to Richard Harris, a psychology professor at Kansas State University, who studied why people like to cite films in social situations, using film quotations in everyday conversation is similar to telling a joke and a way to form solidarity with others. "People are doing it to feel good about themselves, to make others laugh, to make themselves laugh", he said.[88]Cameron explained the film's success as having significantly benefited from the experience of sharing. "When people have an experience that's very powerful in the movie theatre, they want to go share it. They want to grab their friend and bring them, so that they can enjoy it," he said. "They want to be the person to bring them the news that this is something worth having in their life. That's how Titanic worked."[89] Media Awareness Network stated, "The normal repeat viewing rate for a blockbuster theatrical film is about 5%. The repeat rate for Titanic was over 20%."[8] The box office receipts "were even more impressive" when factoring in "the film's 3 hour and 14 minute length meant that it could only be shown three times a day compared to a normal movie's four showings". In response to this, "[m]any theatres started midnight showings and were rewarded with full houses until almost 3:30 am".[8]Titanic held the record for box office gross for twelve years.[90] Cameron's most recent film, Avatar, was considered the first film with a genuine chance at surpassing its worldwide gross,[91][92] and did so in 2010.[66] Various explanations for why the film was able to successfully challenge Titanic were given. For one, "Two-thirds of Titanic's haul was earned overseas, and Avatar [tracked] similarly... Avatar opened in 106 markets globally and was no. 1 in all of them" and the markets "such as Russia, where Titanic saw modest receipts in 1997 and 1998, are white-hot today" with "more screens and moviegoers" than ever before.[93] Brandon Gray, president of Box Office Mojo, said that while Avatar may beat Titanic's revenue record, the film is unlikely to surpass Titanic in attendance. "Ticket prices were about $3 cheaper in the late 1990s."[91] In December 2009, Cameron had stated, "I don't think it's realistic to try to topple Titanic off its perch. Some pretty good movies have come out in the last few years. Titanic just struck some kind of chord."[80] In a January 2010 interview, he gave a different take on the matter once Avatar's performance was easier to predict. "It's gonna happen. It's just a matter of time," he said.[92]Titanic garnered mostly positive reviews from film critics. Review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes reports the film as holding an overall 87% "Certified Fresh" approval rating based on 166 reviews, with a rating average of 7.8 out of 10. The site's general consensus is that the film is "[a] mostly unqualified triumph for Cameron, who offers a dizzying blend of spectacular visuals and old-fashioned melodrama".[82] At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 0100 reviews from film critics, the film has a rating score of 74 based on 34 reviews, classified as a generally favorably reviewed film.[94]With regard to the film's overall design, Roger Ebert stated, "It is flawlessly crafted, intelligently constructed, strongly acted, and spellbinding... Movies like this are not merely difficult to make at all, but almost impossible to make well." He credited the "technical difficulties" with being "so daunting that it's a wonder when the filmmakers are also able to bring the drama and history into proportion" and "found [himself] convinced by both the story and the sad saga".[95] He named it as his ninth best film of 1997.[96] On the television program Siskel & Ebert, the film received "two thumbs up" and was praised for its accuracy in recreating the ship's sinking; Ebert described the film as "a glorious Hollywood epic, well-crafted and well worth the wait" and Gene Siskel found Leonardo DiCaprio "captivating".[97] James Berardinelli stated, "Meticulous in detail, yet vast in scope and intent, Titanic is the kind of epic motion picture event that has become a rarity. You don't just watch Titanic, you experience it."[98] It was named his second best film of 1997.[99] Almar Haflidason of the BBC wrote that "[t]he sinking of the great ship is no secret, yet for many exceeded expectations in sheer scale and tragedy" and that "when you consider that [the film] tops a bum-numbing three-hour running time, then you have a truly impressive feat of entertainment achieved by Cameron".[100] Joseph McBride of Boxoffice Magazine concluded, "To describe Titanic as the greatest disaster movie ever made is to sell it short. James Cameron's recreation of the 1912 sinking of the 'unsinkable' liner is one of the most magnificent pieces of serious popular entertainment ever to emanate from Hollywood."[101]The romantic and emotionally-charged aspects of the film were equally praised. Andrew L. Urban of Urban Cinefile said, "You will walk out of Titanic not talking about budget or running time, but of its enormous emotive power, big as the engines of the ship itself, determined as its giant propellers to gouge into your heart, and as lasting as the love story that propels it."[102] Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly described the film as, "A lush and terrifying spectacle of romantic doom. Writer-director James Cameron has restaged the defining catastrophe of the early 20th century on a human scale of such purified yearning and dread that he touches the deepest levels of popular moviemaking."[101] Janet Maslin of The New York Times commented that "Cameron's magnificent Titanic is the first spectacle in decades that honestly invites comparison to Gone With the Wind."[101] Richard Corliss of Time magazine, on the other hand, wrote a mostly negative review, criticizing the lack of interesting emotional elements.[103]Some reviewers felt that the story and dialogue were weak, while the visuals were spectacular. Kenneth Turan's review in the Los Angeles Times was particularly scathing. Dismissing the emotive elements, he stated, "What really brings on the tears is Cameron's insistence that writing this kind of movie is within his abilities. Not only is it not, it is not even close.",[104] and later claimed that the only reason that the film won Oscars was because of its box office total.[105] Barbara Shulgasser of The San Francisco Examiner gave Titanic one star out of four, citing a friend as saying, "The number of times in this unbelievably badly-written script that the two [lead characters] refer to each other by name was an indication of just how dramatically the script lacked anything more interesting for the actors to say."[106] Also, filmmaker Robert Altman called it "the most dreadful piece of work I've ever seen in my entire life".[107] In his 2012 study of the lives of the passengers on the Titanic, historian Richard Davenport-Hines says "Cameron's film diabolized rich Americans and educated English, anathematizing their emotional restraint, good tailoring, punctilious manners and grammatical training, while it made romantic heroes of the poor Irish and the unlettered".[108]Titanic suffered backlash in addition to its success. In 2003, the film topped a poll of "Best Film Endings",[109] and yet it also topped a poll by The Film programme as "the worst movie of all time".[110] The British film magazine Empire reduced their rating of the film from the maximum five stars and an enthusiastic review, to four stars with a less positive review in a later edition, to accommodate its readers' tastes, who wanted to disassociate themselves from the hype surrounding the film, and the reported activities of its fans, such as those attending multiple screenings.[111] In addition to this, positive and negative parodies and other such spoofs of the film abounded and were circulated on the internet, often inspiring passionate responses from fans of various opinions of the film.[112] Benjamin Willcock of DVDActive.com did not understand the backlash or the passionate hatred for the film. "What really irks me...," he said, "are those who make nasty stabs at those who do love it." Willcock stated, "I obviously don't have anything against those who dislike Titanic, but those few who make you feel small and pathetic for doing so (and they do exist, trust me) are way beyond my understanding and sympathy."[79]Cameron responded to the backlash, and Kenneth Turan's review in particular. "Titanic is not a film that is sucking people in with flashy hype and spitting them out onto the street feeling let down and ripped off," he stated. "They are returning again and again to repeat an experience that is taking a 3-hour and 14-minute chunk out of their lives, and dragging others with them, so they can share the emotion." Cameron emphasized people from all ages (ranging from 8 to 80) and from all backgrounds were "celebrating their own essential humanity" by seeing it. He described the script as earnest and straightforward, and said it intentionally "incorporates universals of human experience and emotion that are timeless  and familiar because they reflect our basic emotional fabric" and that the film was able to succeed in this way by dealing with archetypes. He did not see it as pandering. "Turan mistakes archetype for cliche," he said. "I don't share his view that the best scripts are only the ones that explore the perimeter of human experience, or flashily pirouette their witty and cynical dialogue for our admiration."[113]Empire eventually reinstated its original five star rating of the film, commenting, "It should be no surprise then that it became fashionable to bash James Cameron's Titanic at approximately the same time it became clear that this was the planet's favourite film. Ever. Them's the facts."[114]Titanic began its awards sweep starting with the Golden Globes, winning four, namely Best Motion Picture  Drama, Best Director, Best Original Score, and Best Original Song.[115] Kate Winslet and Gloria Stuart were also nominees, but lost.[116] It won the ACE "Eddie" Award, ASC Award, Art Directors Guild Award, Cinema Audio Society Awards, Screen Actors Guild Award (Best Supporting Actress for Gloria Stuart), The Directors Guild of America Award, and Broadcast Film Critics Association Award (Best Director for James Cameron), and The Producer Guild of America Award.[117] It was also nominated for ten BAFTA awards, including Best Film and Best Director; however, it failed to win any.[117]The film garnered fourteen Academy Awards nominations, tying the record set in 1950 by Joseph L. Mankiewicz's All About Eve[118] and won eleven: Best Picture, Best Director, Best Art Direction, Best Cinematography, Best Visual Effects, Best Film Editing, Best Costume Design, Best Sound (Gary Rydstrom, Tom Johnson, Gary Summers, Mark Ulano), Best Sound Effects Editing, Best Original Dramatic Score, Best Original Song.[117][119] Kate Winslet, Gloria Stuart and the make-up artists were the three nominees that did not win. James Cameron's original screenplay and Leonardo DiCaprio were not nominees.[77] It was the second film to win eleven Academy Awards, after Ben-Hur.[117] The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King would also match this record in 2004, with its eleven wins from eleven nominations.Titanic won the 1997 Academy Award for Best Original Song, as well as three Grammy Awards for Record of the Year, Song of the Year, and Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or Television.[117][120] The film's soundtrack became the best-selling primarily orchestral soundtrack of all time, and became a worldwide success, spending sixteen weeks at number-one in the United States, and was certified diamond for over eleven million copies sold in the United States alone.[121] The soundtrack also became the best-selling album of 1998 in the U.S.[122] "My Heart Will Go On" won the Grammy Awards for Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or for Television. The film also won Best Male Performance for Leonardo DiCaprio and Best Movie at the MTV Movie Awards, Best Film at the People's Choice Awards, and Favorite Movie at the 1998 Kids' Choice Awards.[117] It won various awards outside the United States, including the Awards of the Japanese Academy as the Best Foreign Film of the Year.[117] Titanic eventually won nearly ninety awards and had an additional forty-seven nominations from various award-giving bodies around the world.[117] Additionally, the book about the making of the film was at the top of The New York Times' bestseller list for several weeks, "the first time that such a tie-in book had achieved this status".[8]Since its release, Titanic has appeared on the American Film Institute's award-winning 100 Years series. So far, it has ranked on the following six lists:Titanic was released worldwide in widescreen and pan and scan formats on VHS and laserdisc on September 1, 1998.[128] The VHS was also made available in a deluxe boxed gift set with a mounted filmstrip and six lithograph prints from the movie. A DVD version was released on August 31, 1999 in a widescreen-only (non-anamorphic) single-disc edition with no special features other than a theatrical trailer. Cameron stated at the time that he intended to release a special edition with extra features later. This release became the best-selling DVD of 1999 and early 2000, becoming the first DVD ever to sell one million copies.[129] At the time, fewer than 5% of all U.S. homes had a DVD player. "When we released the original Titanic DVD, the industry was much smaller, and bonus features were not the standard they are now," said Meagan Burrows, Paramount's president of domestic home entertainment, which made the film's DVD performance even more impressive.[129]Titanic was re-released to DVD on October 25, 2005 when a three-disc Special Collector's Edition was made available in the United States and Canada. This edition contained a newly restored transfer of the film, as well as various special features.[130] An international two and four-disc set followed on November 7, 2005.[129][131] The two-disc edition was marketed as the Special Edition, and featured the first two discs of the three-disc set, only PAL-enabled. A four-disc edition, marketed as the Deluxe Collector's Edition, was also released on November 7, 2005.[131]Also, available only in the United Kingdom, a limited 5-disc set of the film, under the title Deluxe Limited Edition, was released with only 10,000 copies manufactured. The fifth disc contains Cameron's documentary Ghosts of the Abyss, which was distributed by Walt Disney Pictures. Unlike the individual release of Ghosts of the Abyss, which contained two discs, only the first disc was included in the set.[79]As regards to television broadcasts, the film airs occasionally across the United States on networks such as TNT.[132] To permit the scene where Jack draws the nude portrait of Rose to be shown on network and specialty cable channels, in addition to minor cuts, the sheer, see-through robe worn by Winslet was digitally painted black. Turner Classic Movies also began to show the film, specifically during the days leading up to the 82nd Academy Awards.[133]A 2012 re-release, also known as Titanic in 3D,[134] was created by re-mastering the original to 4K resolution and post-converting to stereoscopic 3D format. The Titanic 3D version took 60 weeks and $18million to produce, including the 4K restoration.[135] The 3D conversion was preformed by Stereo D[136] and Sony with Slam Content's Panther Records remastering the soundtrack.[137] Digital 2D and in 2D IMAX versions were also struck from the new 4K master created in the process.[138] For the 3D release, Cameron opened up the Super 35 film and expanded the image of the film into a new aspect ratio, from 2:35:1 to 1:78:1, allowing the viewer to see more image on the top and bottom of the screen.[139] The only scene entirely redone for the re-release was Rose's view of the night sky at sea, on the morning of April 15, 1912. The scene was replaced with an accurate view of the night-sky star pattern, including the Milky Way, adjusted for the location in the North Atlantic Ocean in April 1912. The change was prompted by astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson, who had criticized the scene for showing an unrealistic star pattern. He agreed to send film director Cameron a corrected view of the sky, which was the basis of the new scene.[140]The 3D version of Titanic premiered at the Royal Albert Hall in London on March 27, 2012, with James Cameron and Kate Winslet in attendance,[141] and entered general release on April 4, 2012, six days shy of the centenary of RMS Titanic embarking on her maiden voyage.[142][143][144]Rolling Stone film critic Peter Travers rated the reissue 3.5 stars out of 4 explaining he found it "pretty damn dazzling". He said, "The 3D intensifies Titanic. You are there. Caught up like never before in an intimate epic that earns its place in the movie time capsule."[145] Writing for Entertainment Weekly, Owen Gleiberman gave the film an A grade. He wrote, "For once, the visuals in a 3-D movie don't look darkened or distracting. They look sensationally crisp and alive."[146] However, Richard Corliss of Time who was very critical in 1997 remained in the same mood, "I had pretty much the same reaction: fitfully awed, mostly water-logged." In regards to the 3D effects, he noted the "careful conversion to 3D lends volume and impact to certain moments ... [but] in separating the foreground and background of each scene, the converters have carved the visual field into discrete, not organic, levels."[147] Ann Hornaday for The Washington Post found herself asking "whether the film's twin values of humanism and spectacle are enhanced by Cameron's 3-D conversion, and the answer to that is: They aren't." She further added that the "3-D conversion creates distance where there should be intimacy, not to mention odd moments in framing and composition."[148]The film grossed an estimated $4.7million on the first day of its re-release in North America (including midnight preview showings) and went on to make $17.3million over the weekend, finishing in third place.[149][150] Outside of North America it earned $35.2million finishing second,[151] and improved on its performance the following weekend by topping the box office with $98.9million.[152] China has proven to be its most successful territory where it earned $11.6million on its opening day,[153] going on to earn a record-breaking $67million in its opening week and taking more money in the process than it did in the entirety of its original theatrical run.[152] The reissue earned $57.8million in North America and $285.6million from other territories (with over $100 million coming from China alone), for a worldwide total of $343.4million.[154]     James CameronJon LandauLeonardo DiCaprioKate WinsletBilly ZaneFrances FisherGloria StuartConrad BuffJames CameronRichard A. Harris20th Century Fox[1]Paramount Pictures[1]Lightstorm Entertainment[1]Paramount Pictures (USA)20th Century Fox (International)November 1, 1997(1997-11-01) (Tokyo International Film Festival)December 19, 1997(1997-12-19) (United States)1 Plot2 Cast

2.1 Fictional characters
2.2 Historical characters
2.3 Cameos

2.1 Fictional characters2.2 Historical characters2.3 Cameos3 Pre-production

3.1 Writing and inspiration
3.2 Scale modeling

3.1 Writing and inspiration3.2 Scale modeling4 Production5 Post-production

5.1 Effects
5.2 Editing
5.3 Music and soundtrack

5.1 Effects5.2 Editing5.3 Music and soundtrack6 Release

6.1 Initial screening
6.2 Box office

6.2.1 Initial theatrical run
6.2.2 Commercial analysis


6.3 Critical reception
6.4 Accolades
6.5 Home media
6.6 3D conversion

6.1 Initial screening6.2 Box office

6.2.1 Initial theatrical run
6.2.2 Commercial analysis

6.2.1 Initial theatrical run6.2.2 Commercial analysis6.3 Critical reception6.4 Accolades6.5 Home media6.6 3D conversion7 References8 Further reading9 External links2.1 Fictional characters2.2 Historical characters2.3 Cameos3.1 Writing and inspiration3.2 Scale modeling5.1 Effects5.2 Editing5.3 Music and soundtrack6.1 Initial screening6.2 Box office

6.2.1 Initial theatrical run
6.2.2 Commercial analysis

6.2.1 Initial theatrical run6.2.2 Commercial analysis6.3 Critical reception6.4 Accolades6.5 Home media6.6 3D conversion6.2.1 Initial theatrical run6.2.2 Commercial analysisLeonardo DiCaprio as Jack Dawson: Cameron said he needed the cast to feel as though they were really on the Titanic, relive its liveliness, and "to take that energy and give it to Jack, [...] an artist who is able to have his heart soar".[6] Jack is portrayed as a homeless, poor man from Chippewa Falls, Wisconsin who has toured various parts of the world, primarily Paris. He wins two tickets onto the RMS Titanic in a poker game and travels as a third-class passenger with his friend Fabrizio. He is attracted to Rose at first sight and meets her when she attempts to throw herself off the stern of the ship. This enables him to mix with the first-class passengers for a night. When casting the role, various established actors, including Matthew McConaughey, Chris O'Donnell, Billy Crudup and Stephen Dorff, were considered, but Cameron felt that a few of the actors were too old for the part of a 20-year-old.[7][8][9][10] "Tom Cruise expressed an interest in [portraying] the character, though his superstar asking price was never taken seriously."[8] Cameron considered Jared Leto for the role but he refused to audition.[11] DiCaprio, 22 years old at the time, was brought to Cameron's attention by casting director Mali Finn.[7] Initially, he did not want to portray the character, and refused to read his first romantic scene on the set (see below). Cameron said, "He read it once, then started goofing around, and I could never get him to focus on it again. But for one split second, a shaft of light came down from the heavens and lit up the forest." Cameron strongly believed in DiCaprio's acting ability, and told him, "Look, I'm not going to make this guy brooding and neurotic. I'm not going to give him a tic and a limp and all the things you want." Cameron rather envisioned the character as a James Stewart type.[7]Kate Winslet as Rose DeWitt Bukater: Cameron said Winslet "had the thing that you look for" and that there was "a quality in her face, in her eyes," that he "just knew people would be ready to go the distance with her".[6] Rose is a 17-year-old girl, originally from Philadelphia, who is forced into an engagement to 30-year-old Cal Hockley so she and her mother, Ruth, can maintain their high-class status after her father's death had left the family debt-ridden. Rose boards the RMS Titanic with Cal and Ruth, as a first-class passenger, and meets Jack. Winslet said of her character, "She has got a lot to give, and she's got a very open heart. And she wants to explore and adventure the world, but she [feels] that's not going to happen."[6] Gwyneth Paltrow, Claire Danes, and Gabrielle Anwar had been considered for the role.[7][12][13] When they turned it down, 22-year-old Winslet campaigned heavily for the role. She sent Cameron daily notes from England, which led Cameron to invite her to Hollywood for auditions. As with DiCaprio, casting director Mali Finn originally brought her to Cameron's attention. When looking for a Rose, Cameron described the character as "an Audrey Hepburn type" and was initially uncertain about casting Winslet even after her screen test impressed him.[7] After she screen tested with DiCaprio, Winslet was so thoroughly impressed with him, that she whispered to Cameron, "He's great. Even if you don't pick me, pick him." Winslet sent Cameron a single rose with a card signed "From Your Rose" and lobbied him by phone. "You don't understand!" she pleaded one day when she reached him by mobile phone in his Humvee. "I am Rose! I don't know why you're even seeing anyone else!" Her persistence, as well as her talent, eventually convinced him to cast her in the role.[7]Billy Zane as Caledon Nathan "Cal" Hockley: Cal is Rose's 30-year-old fianc. He is arrogant and snobbish, and the heir to a steel fortune in Pittsburgh. He becomes increasingly embarrassed, jealous, and cruel about Rose's relationship with Jack. He later commits suicide after losing his fortune in the Wall Street Crash of 1929. The part was originally offered to Matthew McConaughey.[8]Frances Fisher as Ruth DeWitt Bukater: Rose's widowed mother, who arranges her daughter's engagement to Cal to maintain her family's high-society status. She loves her daughter but believes that social position is more important. She scorns Jack, even though he saved her daughter's life.Gloria Stuart as Rose Dawson Calvert: Rose narrates the film in a modern-day framing device. Cameron stated, "In order to see the present and the past, I decided to create a fictional survivor who is [close to] 101 years, and she connects us in a way through history."[6] The 100-year-old Rose gives Lovett information regarding the "Heart of the Ocean" after he discovers a nude drawing of her in the wreck. She tells the story of her time aboard the ship, mentioning Jack for the first time since the sinking. At 87, Stuart had to be made up to look older for the role.[8] Of casting Stuart, Cameron stated, "My casting director found her. She was sent out on a mission to find retired actresses from the Golden Age of the thirties and forties."[14] Cameron said that he did not know who Stuart was, and Fay Wray was also considered for the role. "But [Stuart] was just so into it, and so lucid, and had such a great spirit. And I saw the connection between her spirit and [Winslet's] spirit," stated Cameron. "I saw this joie de vivre in both of them, that I thought the audience would be able to make that cognitive leap that it's the same person."[14] Winslet and Stuart stated their belief that the character dies at the end of the film,[15][16] while Cameron states in his DVD commentary that he prefers to leave the viewers to form their own interpretation of the ending.[17] Stuart died on September 26, 2010, at age 100, approximately the same age elder Rose was in the film.[18]Bill Paxton as Brock Lovett: A treasure hunter looking for the "Heart of the Ocean" in the wreck of the Titanic in the present. Time and funding for his expedition are running out. He later reflects at the film's conclusion that, despite thinking about Titanic for three years, he has never understood it until he hears Rose's story.Suzy Amis as Lizzy Calvert: Rose's granddaughter, who accompanies her when she visits Lovett on the ship.Danny Nucci as Fabrizio De Rossi: Jack's Italian best friend, who boards the RMS Titanic with him after Jack wins two tickets in a poker game. Fabrizio does not board a lifeboat when the Titanic sinks and is killed when one of the ship's funnels breaks and crashes into the water.David Warner as Spicer Lovejoy: An ex-Pinkerton constable, Lovejoy is Cal's English valet and bodyguard, who keeps an eye on Rose and is suspicious about the circumstances surrounding Jack's rescue of her. He dies when the Titanic splits in half, causing him to fall into a massive opening.Jason Barry as Thomas "Tommy" Ryan: An Irish third-class passenger who befriends Jack and Fabrizio. Tommy is killed when he is accidentally pushed forward and shot by a panicked First Officer Murdoch.Kathy Bates as Margaret "Molly" Brown: Brown is looked down on upon by other first-class women, including Ruth, as "vulgar" and "new money" due to her sudden wealth. She is friendly to Jack and lends him a dinner jacket (bought for her son) when he is invited to dinner in the first-class dining saloon. Although Brown was a real person, Cameron chose not to portray her real-life actions. Molly Brown was dubbed "The Unsinkable Molly Brown" by historians because she, with the support of other women, commandeered Lifeboat 6 from Quartermaster Hichens.[20] Some aspects of this altercation are portrayed in Cameron's film.Victor Garber as Thomas Andrews: The ship's builder, Andrews is portrayed as a very kind and pleasant man who is modest about his grand achievement. After the collision, he tries to convince the others, particularly Ismay, that it is a "mathematical certainty" that the ship will sink. He is depicted during the sinking of the ship as standing next to the clock in the first-class smoking room, lamenting his failure to build a strong and safe ship.Bernard Hill as Captain Edward John Smith: Smith planned to make the Titanic his final voyage before retiring. He retreats into the bridge as the ship sinks, dying when water bursts through the windows whilst he clings to the ship's wheel. It is often disputed whether he died this way or later froze to death, as he was reported seen near the overturned Collapsible B.[21]Jonathan Hyde as Joseph Bruce Ismay: Ismay is portrayed as a rich, ignorant upper-class man. In the film, he uses his position as White Star Line managing director to influence Captain Smith to go faster with the prospect of an earlier arrival in New York and favorable press attention; while this action appears in popular portrayals of the disaster, it is unsupported by evidence.[22][23] After the collision, he struggles to comprehend that his "unsinkable" ship is doomed, later sneaking on board a lifeboat to escape.Eric Braeden as John Jacob Astor IV: A first-class passenger whom Rose calls the richest man on the ship. The film depicts Astor and his 18-year-old wife Madeleine as being introduced to Jack by Rose in the first-class dining saloon. During the introduction, Astor asks if Jack is connected to the 'Boston Dawsons', a question Jack neatly deflects by saying that he is instead affiliated with the Chippewa Falls Dawsons. Astor is last seen as the Grand Staircase glass dome implodes and water surges in. In reality, Astor died after being crushed when one of the ship's funnels collapsed.[24]Bernard Fox as Colonel Archibald Gracie IV: The film depicts Gracie making a comment to Cal that "women and machinery don't mix", and congratulating Jack for saving Rose from falling off the ship, though he is unaware that it was a suicide attempt. Fox also portrayed lookout Frederick Fleet in the 1958 film A Night to Remember.Michael Ensign as Benjamin Guggenheim: A mining magnate traveling in first-class. He shows off his French mistress Madame Aubert to his fellow passengers while his family waits for him at home. When Jack joins the other first-class passengers for dinner after his rescue of Rose, Guggenheim refers to him as a "bohemian".Jonathan Evans-Jones as Wallace Hartley: The ship's bandmaster and violinist who plays uplifting music with his colleagues on the boat deck as the ship sinks. As the final plunge begins, he leads the band in a final performance of Nearer, My God, to Thee, to the tune of Bethany,[25][26] and dies in the sinking.Ewan Stewart as First Officer William Murdoch: The officer who is put in charge of the bridge on the night the ship struck the iceberg. During a rush for the lifeboats, Murdoch shoots Tommy Ryan as well as another passenger in a momentary panic, then commits suicide out of guilt, a fictional account that was met with criticism. When Murdoch's nephew Scott saw the film, he objected to his uncle's portrayal as damaging to Murdoch's heroic reputation.[27] A few months later, Fox vice-president Scott Neeson went to Dalbeattie, Scotland, where Murdoch lived, to deliver a personal apology, and also presented a 5000 donation to Dalbeattie High School to boost the school's William Murdoch Memorial Prize.[28] Cameron apologized on the DVD commentary, but noted that there were officers who fired gunshots to enforce the "women and children first" policy.[29]Jonathan Phillips as Second Officer Charles Lightoller. The film depicts Lightoller telling Captain Smith that it will be difficult to see icebergs with no breaking water. He is seen brandishing a gun and threatening to use it to keep order. He can be seen on top of Collapsible B when the first funnel collapses. Lightoller was the most senior officer to survive the disaster.Mark Lindsay Chapman as Chief Officer Henry Wilde: The ship's chief officer, who lets Cal on board a lifeboat because he has a child in his arms. Before he dies, he tries to get the boats to return to the sinking site to rescue passengers by blowing his whistle. After he freezes to death, Rose uses his whistle to attract the attention of Fifth Officer Lowe, which leads to her rescue.Ioan Gruffudd as Fifth Officer Harold Lowe: The only ship's officer who led a lifeboat to retrieve survivors of the sinking on the icy waters. The film depicts Lowe rescuing Rose.Edward Fletcher as Sixth Officer James Moody: The ship's only junior officer who died in the sinking. The film depicts Moody admitting Jack and Fabrizio onto the ship only moments before it departs from Southampton. Moody is later shown following Mr. Murdoch's orders to put the ship to full speed ahead, and informs First Officer Murdoch about the iceberg.James Lancaster as Father Thomas Byles: Father Byles, a Catholic priest from England, is portrayed praying and consoling passengers during the ship's final moments.Lew Palter and Elsa Raven as Isidor Straus and Ida Straus: Isidor is a former owner of R.H. Macy and Company, a former congressman from New York, and a member of the New York and New Jersey Bridge Commission. During the sinking, his wife Ida is offered a place in a lifeboat, but refuses, saying that she will honor her wedding pledge by staying with Isidor. They are last seen lying on their bed embracing each other as water fills their stateroom.Martin Jarvis as Sir Cosmo Duff-Gordon: A Scottish baronet who is rescued in Lifeboat 1. Duff-Gordon's conduct was much criticized in the years after the disaster. He and his wife were among only 12 people in Lifeboat #1, whose capacity was 40. It was suggested that he had boarded the emergency boat in violation of the "women and children first" policy, that the boat had failed to return to rescue those struggling in the water, and that his offer of five pounds to each of the lifeboat's crew might be viewed as a bribe to keep their distance from those still in the water. The Duff-Gordons at the time (and his wife's secretary in a letter written at the time and rediscovered in 2007) stated that there had been no women or children waiting to board in the vicinity of the launching of their boat, and there is confirmation that lifeboat 1 of the Titanic was almost empty and that First Officer William Murdoch was apparently glad to offer Duff-Gordon and his wife and her secretary a place (simply to fill it) after they had asked if they could get on. Duff-Gordon denied that his offer of money to the lifeboat crew represented a bribe. The British Board of Trade's inquiry into the disaster accepted Duff-Gordon's denial of bribing the crew, but maintained that, if the emergency boat had rowed towards the people who were in the water, it might very well have been able to rescue some of them.[30][31]Rosalind Ayres as Lady Duff-Gordon: A world-famous fashion designer and Sir Cosmo's wife. She is rescued in Lifeboat 1 with her husband. She and her husband never lived down rumors that they had forbidden the lifeboat's crew to return to the wreck site in case they would be swamped.[32][33][34]Rochelle Rose as Nol Leslie, Countess of Rothes: The Countess is shown to be friendly with Cal and the DeWitt Bukaters. Despite being of a higher status in society than Sir Cosmo and Lady Duff-Gordon, she is kind, and helps row the boat and even looks after the steerage passengers.Scott G. Anderson as Frederick Fleet: The lookout who saw the iceberg. Fleet escapes the sinking ship aboard Lifeboat 6.Paul Brightwell as Quartermaster Robert Hichens: One of the ship's six quartermasters and at the ship's wheel at the time of collision. He is in charge of lifeboat 6. He refuses to go back and pick up survivors after the sinking and eventually the boat is commandeered by Molly Brown.Martin East as Reginald Lee: The other lookout in the crow's nest. He survives the sinking.Simon Crane as Fourth Officer Joseph Boxhall: The officer in charge of firing flares and manning Lifeboat 2 during the sinking. He is shown on the bridge wings helping the seamen firing the flares.Gregory Cooke as Jack Phillips: Senior wireless operator on board the Titanic whom Captain Smith ordered to send the distress signal.Craig Kelly as Harold Bride: Junior wireless operator on board the Titanic.Liam Tuohy as Chief Baker Charles Joughin: The baker appears in the film on top of the railing with Jack and Rose as the ship sinks, drinking brandy from a flask. According to the real Joughin's testimony he rode the ship down and stepped into the water without getting his hair wet. He also admitted to hardly feeling the cold, most likely thanks to alcohol.[35]Terry Forrestal as Chief Engineer Joseph G. Bell: Bell and his men worked until the last minute to keep the lights and the power on in order for distress signals to get out. Bell and all of the engineers died in the bowels of the Titanic.Kevin De La Noy as Third Officer Herbert Pitman: In charge of Lifeboat 5.Frakes, Randall (1998). Titanic: James Cameron's Illustrated Screenplay. New York: Harper. ISBN0-06-095307-1.Cameron, Stephen (1998). Titanic: Belfast's Own. Ireland: Wolfhound Press. ISBN0-86327-685-7.Mireille Majoor; James Cameron (2003). Titanic: Ghosts of the Abyss. New York: Scholastic. ISBN1-895892-31-7.Molony, Senan (2005). Titanic: A Primary Source History. Canada: Gareth Stevens. ISBN0-8368-5980-4.Marsh, Ed W.; Kirkland, Douglas (1998). James Cameron's Titanic. London: Boxtree. ISBN0-7522-2404-2.Parisi, Paula (1998). Titanic and the Making of James Cameron. London: Orion. ISBN0-7528-1799-X. http://books.google.ca/books?id=7A9ws0inw4YC&lpg=PP1&dq=James%20Cameron&pg=PP1#v=onepage&q&f=true.Sandler, Kevin S.; Studlar, Gaylyn, eds. (1999). Titanic: Anatomy of a Blockbuster. Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press. ISBN978-0-8135-2669-0.Ballard, Robert (1987). The Discovery of the Titanic. Canada: Grand Central Publishing. ISBN0-446-67174-6.Lynch, Donald (1992). Titanic: An Illustrated History. New York: Madison Press Books. ISBN978-0-7868-6401-0.Lubin, David M. (1999). "Titanic" (BFI Modern Classics). London: BFI Publishing. ISBN0-85170-760-2.Official websiteTitanic at the Internet Movie DatabaseTitanic at the TCM Movie DatabaseTitanic at AllRoviTitanic at Rotten TomatoesTitanic at MetacriticTitanic at Box Office MojoTitanic at The NumbersFargo is a 1996 American crime film produced, directed and written by brothers Joel and Ethan Coen. It stars Frances McDormand as a pregnant police chief who investigates a series of homicides and William H. Macy as a car salesman who hires two criminals to kidnap his wife. Steve Buscemi and Peter Stormare play the criminals and Harve Presnell plays the salesman's father-in-law.The film earned seven Academy Award nominations, winning two for Best Original Screenplay for the Coens and Best Actress in a Leading Role for McDormand.[1] It also won the BAFTA Award and the Award for Best Director for Joel Coen at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival.[2]In 2006 it was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and inducted into the United States National Film Registry. In 2012, Slant Magazine ranked the film #36 on its list of the 100 Best Films of the 1990s.[3]In the winter of 1987, Minneapolis automobile salesman Jerry Lundegaard (Macy) is in financial trouble. After being introduced to criminals Carl Showalter (Buscemi) and Gaear Grimsrud (Stormare) by Native American ex-convict Shep Proudfoot (Reevis), a mechanic at his dealership, Jerry travels to Fargo, North Dakota, and hires the two men to kidnap his wife Jean (Rudrd) in exchange for a new car and half of the $80,000 ransom. However, Jerry intends to demand a much larger sum from his wealthy father-in-law, Wade Gustafson (Presnell), and keep most of the money for himself.GMAC has been threatening to withdraw loans for cars at the dealership Jerry manages after accounting irregularities. Jerry has been trying to raise money by promoting a real estate deal to Wade. Jerry tries to call off the kidnapping after Wade agrees to the investment, but he is too late, and, as it turns out, Wade intends to buy the property himself, giving Jerry only a finder's fee, which is not enough to pay off his debts.Carl and Gaear kidnap Jean, but on their way through Brainerd, a Minnesota State Patrol officer stops them because of the car's untagged license plates. When Carl's attempt to bribe the trooper fails, Gaear kills the trooper. As Carl is moving the trooper's body off the road, he is seen by a couple passing by in their car. Gaear chases the couple, who lose control of their car and swerve off the road, enabling Gaear to kill them.The deaths are investigated by local police chief Marge Gunderson (McDormand), who is seven months pregnant. She deduces the chain of events and follows the leads that arise, interviewing two prostitutes who serviced the criminals and tracing the license plates on their vehicle to Jerry's dealership. After being informed that the criminals telephoned Shep Proudfoot, she drives to Minneapolis, but acquires no information in interviews with Shep and Jerry.Jerry contacts Wade, saying that the kidnappers insist on dealing only with Jerry. Wade accepts this arrangement at first, but later changes his mind. When he meets with Carl at a parking garage, he refuses to give him the money until his daughter is returned. Angered by his demands and unexpected appearance, Carl shoots Wade. Before he dies, Wade shoots Carl in the face. Carl then kills the garage attendant on his way out. Jerry arrives at the scene just after Carl leaves. Later, Carl discovers that the bag he took from Wade contains a million dollars and buries most of the money by the side of the highway. At the hideout, Gaear has killed Jean, and, in a dispute over the car, he kills Carl with an axe.Before leaving town, Marge questions Jerry again, asking him about the car used in the Brainerd murders. When she asks to talk to Wade, Jerry storms out of the office, saying he will check the lot for the missing car but flees instead. Marge phones the state police to find and arrest him, then, following up on a tip, she drives to Moose Lake, sees the kidnappers' car in the driveway of a cabin, and arrives just in time to see Gaear feeding the last of Carl's body into a wood chipper. Gaear tries to flee, but Marge shoots him in the leg and arrests him.Jerry is later arrested in a motel outside of Bismarck, North Dakota. Marge and her husband, Norm (Lynch), sit in bed together discussing his artwork, which has been selected as the design for a postage stamp.Fargo opens with the following text:Although the film itself is completely fictional, the Coen brothers claim that many of the events that take place in the movie were actually based on true events from other cases that they threw together to make one story. Joel Coen noted:"We weren't interested in that kind of fidelity. The basic events are the same as in the real case, but the characterizations are fully imagined...If an audience believes that something's based on a real event, it gives you permission to do things they might otherwise not accept."[4]The Coens claim the actual murders took place, but not in Minnesota.[5] The main reason for the film's setting is the fact that the Coens were born and raised in St. Louis Park, a suburb of Minneapolis.[6]On the special edition DVD's trivia track for Fargo, it is revealed that the main case for the movie's inspiration was based on the infamous 1986 murder of Helle Crafts from Connecticut at the hands of her husband, Richard, who killed her and disposed of her body through a wood chipper.[7]The end credits bear the standard "all persons fictitious" disclaimer for a work of fiction.[8]The unseasonably mild winter of early 1995 forced the crew to move locations frequently to find suitably snow-covered landscapes. Fake snow had to be used for many scenes. Pools and streams of meltwater are visible in many scenes.Locations used during production include:The film's use of "Minnesota nice" and a "singsong" regional accent are remembered years later, with locals fielding requests to say "Yah, you betcha," and other lines from the movie.[13] According to the film's dialect coach, Liz Himelstein, "the accent was another character." She coached the cast using audio tapes and field trips.[14] Another dialogue coach, Larissa Kokernot (who appeared onscreen playing a prostitute), notes that the "small-town, Minnesota accent is close to the sound of the Nords and the Swedes," which is "where the musicality comes from." She also helped McDormand understand Minnesota nice and the practice of head-nodding to show agreement.[15] The strong accent of Jerry and Marge is less common in the Twin Cities, where over 60% of the state's population lives. Speakers from Minneapolis and St. Paul are more characterized by the Northern cities vowel shift, which is also found in other places in the Northern United States such as Chicago, Detroit and Buffalo.Fargo was met with critical acclaim.[16][17] Film critic Roger Ebert named Fargo his fourth favorite film of the 1990s (he also named it "best of 1996").[18] In his original review, Ebert called it "one of the best films I've ever seen" and explained that "films like Fargo are why I love the movies".[19] Many prominent critics named it "best of the year", including Joel Siegel, Lisa Schwartzbaum of Entertainment Weekly, Gene Siskel, and Leonard Maltin.[citation needed] Fargo has the honor of being one of the very few films to ever receive a unanimous 'A' rating from the critical mass of ratings at Entertainment Weekly.[citation needed]The film was ranked number 84 on the American Film Institute's "100 Years...100 Movies" list in 1998 (although it was removed from the 2007 version) and number 93 on its "100 Years...100 Laughs" list. The character Marge Gunderson was ranked number 33 on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains. In 2006, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant"."Top 10 Brilliant Black Comedies" says "Fargo is...one of the best dark comedies ever made...." [20]Fargo was screened at many film festivals. It was in the main competition at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival, where it won the Prix de la mise en scne (Best Director prize). Other festival screenings included the Pusan International Film Festival, the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival and the Naples Film Festival. On March 1, 2006, for the film's tenth anniversary, the annual Fargo Film Festival showed Fargo by projecting the film on the side of the Radisson Hotel (the city's tallest building) in downtown Fargo. The city repeated the event on September 29, 2011.American Film InstituteAs with all the Coen Brothers' films, except O Brother Where Art Thou, the score to Fargo is by Carter Burwell.[26]The main musical motif is based on a Norwegian folk song[27] called "The Lost Sheep", or natively "Den Bortkomne Sauen".Other songs in the film include "Big City" by Merle Haggard, heard in the Fargo bar where Jerry meets with kidnappers Carl and Gaear, and "Let's Find Each Other Tonight" a live nightclub performance by Jos Feliciano that is viewed by Showalter and a female escort. In the diner, when Jerry is urging Wade not to get police involved in his wife's kidnapping, Chuck Mangione's "Feels So Good" can be heard faintly in the background. The restaurant scene with Mike Yanagita is accompanied by a piano arrangement of "Sometimes in Winter" by Blood, Sweat & Tears. None of these songs appear on the soundtrack album.The soundtrack was released in 1996 on TVT Records, combined with selections from the score to Barton Fink.[26]In 1997, a pilot was filmed for a television series based on the film. Set in Brainerd, it starred Edie Falco as Marge Gunderson, and was directed by Kathy Bates; the Coen brothers were not involved. The episode was shown during Trio's 2003 Brilliant But Cancelled series of failed TV shows.[30]In 2012 it was announced that FX is developing a new TV series with the Coens as executive producers.[31]March 8, 1996(1996-03-08)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Fact vs. fiction
3.2 Locations
3.3 Accent

3.1 Fact vs. fiction3.2 Locations3.3 Accent4 Reception

4.1 Critical response
4.2 Film festivals

4.1 Critical response4.2 Film festivals5 Awards and honors

5.1 Wins
5.2 Nominations
5.3 Other honors

5.1 Wins5.2 Nominations5.3 Other honors6 Soundtrack

6.1 Track listing

6.1 Track listing7 Home video releases8 Television spin-offs9 References10 External links3.1 Fact vs. fiction3.2 Locations3.3 Accent4.1 Critical response4.2 Film festivals5.1 Wins5.2 Nominations5.3 Other honors6.1 Track listingFrances McDormand as Marge Gunderson, the pregnant police chief in BrainerdWilliam H. Macy as Jerry Lundegaard, an indebted car dealer who hires two men to kidnap his wifeSteve Buscemi as Carl Showalter, a small-time crook hired to kidnap Jerry's wifePeter Stormare as Gaear Grimsrud, Carl's taciturn partnerHarve Presnell as Wade Gustafson, the wealthy father of Jean LundegaardKristin Rudrd as Jean Lundegaard, Jerry Lundegaard's wifeTony Denman as Scotty Lundegaard, Jerry and Jean's sonLarry Brandenburg as Stan Grossman, an accountant and business partner of Wade GustafsonSteve Reevis as Shep Proudfoot, a Native American ex-convict and mechanic at the car dealershipJohn Carroll Lynch as Norm Gunderson, husband of Marge GundersonSteve Park as Mike Yanagita, a high-school classmate of MargeKing of Clubs, a bar shown at the beginning of the film, was located in Northeast Minneapolis on Central Avenue.[9] It has since been razed to make way for housing for people who are HIV-positive.[10]The Pillsbury Ave., Minneapolis home of Doug Melroe and Denny Kemp includes the kitchen of the Lundegaards' house.[11]The "Wally McCarthy Oldsmobile" car dealership is located in the Minneapolis suburb of Richfield, located off of Interstate 494 and Penn Avenue. It has since been razed, and the site is currently home to Best Buy's corporate headquarters.Ember's was a restaurant just west of the Louisiana exit on the frontage road (Wayzata Blvd.) of Interstate 394 in St. Louis Park. The location is now out of business and the building has been razed. It is now the location of an office building.The kidnappers' hideout cabin is located north of Stillwater, Minnesota.The Edina, Minnesota Police Station was used for interior shots of the Brainerd Police Station.[12]The Lakeside Club, where Marge interviews the hookers, is in Mahtomedi, Minnesota.Carl steals a license plate from the parking lot of the Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport.Chanhassen Dinner Theatres was used for the Jos Feliciano concert.The Minneapolis Club Parking Ramp (located on 8th St. and 3rd Ave, Minneapolis, Minnesota) was used for the scene wherein Wade delivers the money to Carl. The end of the scene, where Carl exits the parking garage, was actually shot at a different garage down the street  the Centre Village Parking Ramp (located at 8th St. and 5th Ave.).The Paul Bunyan [12] statue was located west of Bathgate, North Dakota on Pembina County Highway 1.Mr. Mohra's home was filmed on the corner of 3rd Street and Bryan Avenue in Hallock, Minnesota.[12]The Hitching Post Motel, in Forest Lake, Minnesota was used when Jerry is arrested outside of Bismarck.Academy Award for Best Actress  Frances McDormandAcademy Award for Writing Original Screenplay  Joel and Ethan CoenBAFTA David Lean Award for Direction  Joel CoenCannes Film Festival Award for Best Director  Joel Coen[2]New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best FilmNational Board of Review for Best Actress  Frances McDormandNational Board of Review for Best Director  Joel CoenScreen Actors Guild Awards for Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role  Frances McDormandWriters Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen  Joel and Ethan CoenIndependent Spirit Award for Best Film2006 National Film RegistryAcademy Award for Best Picture  Ethan CoenAcademy Award for Directing  Joel CoenAcademy Award for Best Supporting Actor  William H. MacyAcademy Award for Best Cinematography  Roger DeakinsAcademy Award for Film Editing  Roderick JaynesGrand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema CriticsGolden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  Musical or ComedyGolden Globe Award for Best Director  Motion Picture  Joel CoenGolden Globe Award for Best Actress  Motion Picture Musical or Comedy  Frances McDormandGolden Globe Award for Best Screenplay  Motion Picture  Joel and Ethan CoenPalme D'orAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #84AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs - #93AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills - Nominated[21]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Marge Gunderson - #33 Hero
Carl Showalter & Gaear Grimsrud - Nominated Villains[22]

Marge Gunderson - #33 HeroCarl Showalter & Gaear Grimsrud - Nominated Villains[22]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"You betcha!" - Nominated[23]

"You betcha!" - Nominated[23]AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - Nominated[24]AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - Nominated[25]Marge Gunderson - #33 HeroCarl Showalter & Gaear Grimsrud - Nominated Villains[22]"You betcha!" - Nominated[23]The film has been released in several formats: VHS, Laserdisc, DVD, Blu-ray, and iTunes download.The 1996 special edition VHS release included a snow globe that depicted the woodchipper scene which, when shaken, stirred up both snow and "blood".[28]The film was first released on DVD on July 8, 1997 in a bare-bones edition and widescreen transfer.[29]A "Special Edition" DVD was released on September 30, 2003. The opening titles stating "This Is A True Story" have been changed in this edition from the actual titles on the film print to digitally inserted titles. Also, the title preceding Jerry Lundegaard's arrest "Outside of Bismarck, North Dakota" has been inserted digitally and moved from the bottom of the screen to the top.[29]A Blu-ray version was released on May 12, 2009.Fargo at the Internet Movie DatabaseFargo at AllRoviFargo at Box Office MojoFargo at Rotten TomatoesThe Woodchipper in Fargo Exhibit - An exhibit in Fargo, ND featuring the original movie prop wood chipper and memorabilia from the film. Located at the Fargo, ND visitors centerDuck Soup is a 1933 Marx Brothers anarchic comedy film written by Bert Kalmar and Harry Ruby, with additional dialogue by Arthur Sheekman and Nat Perrin, and directed by Leo McCarey. First released theatrically by Paramount Pictures on November 17, 1933, it starred what were then billed as the "Four Marx Brothers" (Groucho, Harpo, Chico, and Zeppo) and also featured Margaret Dumont, Raquel Torres, Louis Calhern and Edgar Kennedy. It was the last Marx Brothers film to feature Zeppo, and the last of five Marx Brothers movies released by Paramount.[1]Compared to the Marx Brothers' previous Paramount films, Duck Soup was a box-office disappointment,[2] although it was not a "flop" as is sometimes reported.[3] The film opened to mixed reviews,[4] although this by itself did not end the group's business with Paramount. Bitter contract disputes, including a threatened walk-out by the Marxes, crippled relationships between them and Paramount just as Duck Soup went into production. After the film fulfilled their five-picture contract with the studio, the Marxes and Paramount agreed to part ways.[5][6]While critics of Duck Soup felt it did not quite meet the standards of its predecessors, critical opinion has evolved and the film has since achieved the status of a classic.[7] Duck Soup is now widely considered to be a masterpiece, and the Marx Brothers' finest film.[4][8]In 1990 the United States Library of Congress deemed Duck Soup "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.[9]The wealthy Mrs. Teasdale (Margaret Dumont) insists that Rufus T. Firefly (Groucho Marx) be appointed leader of the small, bankrupt country of Freedonia before she will continue to provide much-needed financial backing. Meanwhile, neighboring Sylvania is attempting to take over the country. Sylvanian ambassador Trentino (Louis Calhern) tries to foment a revolution, woos Mrs. Teasdale, and attempts to dig up dirt on Firefly by sending in spies Chicolini (Chico Marx) and Pinky (Harpo Marx).After failing to collect worthwhile information about Firefly, Chicolini and Pinky infiltrate the government when Chicolini is appointed Secretary of War after Firefly sees him on the street selling peanuts. Meanwhile, Firefly's personal assistant, Bob Roland (Zeppo Marx) suspects Trentino's questionable motives, and counsels Firefly to "get rid of that man at once" by saying "something to make him mad, and he'll strike you, and we'll force him to leave the country." Firefly agrees to the plan, but after a series of personal insults exchanged between Firefly and Trentino, the plan backfires and Firefly slaps Trentino instead. As a result, the two countries reach the brink of war. Adding to the international friction is the fact that Firefly is also wooing Mrs. Teasdale, and likewise hoping to get his hands on her late husband's wealth.Trentino learns that Freedonia's war plans are in Mrs. Teasdale's possession and orders Chicolini and Pinky to steal them. Chicolini is caught by Firefly and put on trial, during which war is officially declared, and everyone is overcome by war frenzy, breaking into song and dance. The trial put aside, Chicolini and Pinky join Firefly and Bob Roland in anarchic battle, resulting in general mayhem.The end of the film finds Trentino caught in makeshift stocks, with the Brothers pelting him with fruit. Trentino surrenders, but Firefly tells him to wait until they run out of fruit. Mrs. Teasdale begins singing the Freedonia national anthem in her operatic voice and the Brothers begin hurling fruit at her instead.In the "mirror scene," Pinky, dressed as Firefly, pretends to be Firefly's reflection in a missing mirror, matching his every moveincluding absurd ones that begin out of sightto near perfection. In one particularly surreal moment, the two men swap positions, and thus the idea of which is a reflection of the other. Eventually, and to their misfortune, Chicolini, also disguised as Firefly, enters the frame and collides with both of them.Although its appearance in Duck Soup is the best known instance, the concept of the mirror scene did not originate in this film. Charlie Chaplin used it in The Floorwalker (1916)[7] and Max Linder included it in Seven Years Bad Luck (1921), where a man's servants have accidentally broken a mirror and attempt to hide the fact by imitating his actions in the mirror's frame.[10]This scene has been recreated many times; for instance, in the Bugs Bunny cartoon Hare Tonic,[7] the Mickey Mouse cartoon Lonesome Ghosts, in The Three Stooges short Idle Roomers (1944), in The Pink Panther (1963), in the TV series Gilligan's Island ("Gilligan vs. Gilligan", 1966), in the film Big Business (1988), The X-Files ("Dreamland") and Family Guy ("Road to Germany"). Harpo himself did a reprise of this scene, dressed in his usual costume, with Lucille Ball also donning the fright wig and trench coat, in the I Love Lucy episode "Lucy and Harpo Marx".[11]The climactic production number ridicules war by comparing nationalism to a minstrel show. One line is a variant on the old Negro spiritual "All God's Chillun Got Wings" (and was reportedly considered for deletion for the film's current DVD release, for fear of offending African Americans):[5]They got guns,
We got guns,
All God's chillun got guns!
I'm gonna walk all over the battlefield,
'Cause all God's chillun got guns!A portion of the final production sequence is used near the end of the Woody Allen film Hannah and Her Sisters[7] to give Allen's character a motivation to carry on with life.Shortly after, during the final battle scenes, "rightfully [...] called the funniest of all of cinema",[8] Firefly can be seen wearing a different costume in almost every sequence until the end of the film, including American Civil War outfits (first Union and then Confederacy), a British palace guard uniform, a Boy Scout Scoutmaster's uniform, and even a coon-skin Davy Crockett cap. Meanwhile, the exterior view of the building they are occupying changes appearance from a bunker to an old fort, etc. Firefly assures his generals that he has "a man out combing the countryside for volunteers." Sure enough, Pinky is wandering out on the front lines wearing a sandwich board sign reading, "Join the Army and see the Navy." Later, Chicolini volunteers Pinky to carry a message through enemy lines; Firefly tells him, "[...] and remember, while you're out there risking life and limb through shot and shell, we'll be in here thinking what a sucker you are." Thomas Doherty has described this line as "sum[ming] up the Great War cynicism towards all things patriotic".[12]The melodramatic exclamation "This means war!" certainly did not originate with Duck Soup, but it is used several times in the filmat least twice by Trentino and once by Firefly[13]and would be repeated by Groucho in A Night at the Opera and A Day at the Races. Variations of this phrase would later become a frequently-used catch-phrase for Daffy Duck and Bugs Bunny in Warner Bros. cartoons.[14]In another scene, the film pokes fun at the Hays Code by showing a woman's bedroom and then showing a woman's shoes on the floor, a man's shoes and horseshoes. Pinky is sleeping in the bed with the horse; the woman is in the twin bed next to them.The film's writers recycled a joke used in Horse Feathers in this dialogue with Chico:Prosecutor: Chicolini, isn't it true you sold Freedonia's secret war code and plans?
Chicolini: Sure! I sold a code and two pairs o' plans!The street vendor confrontations are also well-remembered pieces of physical comedy:[7][8] Chico and Harpo harass a lemonade seller (comedy film veteran Edgar Kennedy), egged on by his irritation that they have stolen his pitch.First, there is a scene involving the knocking off, dropping, picking up and exchanging of hats. Later, Kennedy (a much larger man) steals bags of Harpo's peanuts, and Harpo responds by burning Kennedy's new straw boater hat; in return, Kennedy pushes over their peanut wagon. Harpo responds by stepping knee-deep into Kennedy's lemonade tank, where he imitates a stereotypical Italian grape-crushing peasant; this drives off Kennedy's waiting line of customers.Just before the Mirror Scene is the Radio Scene. Harpo tries the combination to the safe on a box which proves to be a radio, and it starts blaring the break-up strain of John Philip Sousa's "Stars and Stripes Forever". The music continues despite ongoing efforts to silence, and finally destroy, the radio.Harpo often doffed his hat on-screen, but Chico very rarely removed his Tyrolean hat, even when indoors. For a few seconds on-screen in the earlier scene, Chico's head is uncovered, revealing a wavy wig. Chico had already started going bald when the brothers appeared in their first Broadway production, I'll Say She Is, in 1924. All of the Brothers' natural receding-hairline patterns were similar, but Harpo and Chico covered theirs with wigs.Comparing the original scripts with the finished film, most of the characters' initial scripted names were later changed. Only the names of Chicolini and Mrs. Teasdale were kept. Groucho's characteroriginally named "Rufus T. Firestone"eventually became Rufus T. Firefly, while the name of Harpo's characternamed Pinky in the final productwas given in the pressbook as "Brownie". "Ambassador Frankenstein of Amnesia" was quickly changed to Ambassador Trentino of Sylvania. Zeppo's character remained Firefly's son until very late in production, finally becoming Bob Roland; also, Mrs Teasdale's niece "June Parker" transformed into Vera Marcal, first introduced as Trentino's "niece" before ultimately becoming his companion.[15]The Marx Brothers' previous film, Horse Feathers, had been Paramount's highest-grossing film of 1932. Encouraged by this success, the studio suggested on August 2, 1932, that they rush out a follow-up. Already at this early stage, the story (provisionally entitled Oo La La[7]) was set in a mythical kingdom. On August 11, 1932, The Los Angeles Times reported that production would commence in five weeks with the famed Ernst Lubitsch directing.This was a turbulent time in the Marx Brothers' career. Reorganization at Paramount Pictures brought fears that money due the Brothers would never be paid; as a result, the Brothers threatened to leave Paramount and start their own company, Marx Bros., Inc.[16] Their first planned independent production was a film adaptation of the Pulitzer Prize-winning Broadway musical Of Thee I Sing, with Norman McLeod leaving Paramount to direct.[2] During late 1932 and early 1933, Groucho and Chico were also working on Flywheel, Shyster, and Flywheel, a radio show written by Nat Perrin and Arthur Sheekman; there was even, at one time, talk of casting the two as their radio characters for the new film[16] (an idea that would eventually be used for the later Marx Brothers film The Big Store).[2]By October 4, 1932, Arthur Sheekman, Harry Ruby, and Bert Kalmar began writing the screenplay for the next Paramount film, which was now called Firecrackers.[7][15] Herman Mankiewicz was to supervise production, beginning in January 1933.[16] By December 1932, Firecrackers had become Cracked Ice.[15] Grover Jones was also reported to have contributed to the first draft by Ruby and Kalmar.[16] In The Marx Brothers Encyclopedia, Glenn Mitchell says that "the first script's content is difficult to determine".[17]On January 18, 1933, Harry Ruby, Bert Kalmar and Grover Jones submitted to Paramount their "Second Temporary Script" for Cracked Ice,[15] and Paramount announced that shooting would commence on February 15. This script shows that the basic story of what would become Duck Soup had been fixed. In February, Paramount announced that the title had been changed to Grasshoppers[7] ("because animal stories are so popular"), and that filming was set back to February 20.However, on May 11, 1933, the Marx Brothers' father Sam "Frenchie" Marx died in Los Angeles of a heart attack,[2] and shortly afterwards, the contract dispute with Paramount was settled.[4] The New York Post reported on May 17 that the Brothers would make a new comedy for Paramount, called Duck Soup. Leo McCarey was set for direction of the film. Three days later The New York Sun reported that Duck Soup would start filming in June. Duck Soup's script was completed by July 11.[15] The script was a continuation of Ruby and Kalmar's Firecrackers/Cracked Ice drafts, but contained more elements.[16] Many of the film's clever gags and routines were lifted from Flywheel, Shyster, and Flywheel,[2] giving Perrin and Sheekman an "additional dialogue" credit.Director McCarey reportedly came up with the title for the film, having previously used it for an earlier directorial effort with Laurel and Hardy.[7] This continued the "animal" titles of the Brothers' previous three films, Animal Crackers, Monkey Business and Horse Feathers.[16]"Duck soup" was American English slang at that time; it meant something easy to do.[18] Conversely, "to duck something" meant to avoid it. When Groucho was asked for an explanation of the title, he quipped, "Take two turkeys, one goose, four cabbages, but no duck, and mix them together. After one taste, you'll duck soup for the rest of your life."[7]McCarey also thought up "the very Laurel & Hardy-like sequence in which Harpo and Chico stage a break-in at Mrs Teasdale's house."[16] Another McCarey contribution was the "mirror scene"[2] a revival of an old vaudeville act,[7] (see above).Breaking with their usual pattern, neither Harpo's harp nor Chico's piano is used in the film, although Harpo briefly pretends to play harp on the strings of a piano, strumming chords in accompaniment to a music box that is playing the unlikely chime tune, "Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?" from rival studio Disney's Three Little Pigs, released the same year as Duck Soup.The musical introduction to Groucho's character is similar to the ones in Animal Crackers and Horse Feathers but it did not become closely associated with him as did "Hooray for Captain Spaulding" from Animal Crackers.Zeppo, as usual, plays, according to James Agee, "a peerlessly cheesy improvement on the traditional straight man",[19] in his final on-screen appearance with the Brothers. He sings with the group (including soloing the first few lines of the first song, "When the Clock on the Wall Strikes 10"). He also sings with the others in "Freedonia's Going to War", filling out the four-cornered symmetry as the Brothers sing and dance in pairs during the number.[8]The "Freedonia National Anthem" is used frequently throughout the film, both as vocal and instrumental; the entire song seems to consist of "Hail, Hail, Freedonia, land of the brave and free", contrasting with the final line of The Star-Spangled Banner. The "Sylvania theme", which sounds vaguely like "Rule Britannia", is also used several times. "When The Clock On The Wall Strikes 10", the first musical number in the film, is part of the same scene as "Just Wait 'Til I Get Through With It",[7] Groucho's song about the laws of his administration. "This Country's Going To War"[20] is the final musical ensemble in the film, and is also the only musical number in the Marx Brothers' films to feature all four of the Brothers.The introductory scene, showing ducks swimming in a kettle and quacking merrily, is scored with an instrumental medley of the aforementioned songs, and is also the only scene in the film that has anything remotely to do with ducks or soup.Popular belief holds that Duck Soup was a box office failure, but this is not true. Although it did not do as well as Horse Feathers, it was the sixth-highest grossing film of 1933, according to Glenn Mitchell in The Marx Brothers Encyclopedia and Simon Louvish in Monkey Business, his biography of the Marx Brothers.[2][5][17]One possible reason for the film's lukewarm reception is that it was released during the Great Depression. Audiences were taken aback by such preposterous political disregard, buffoonery, and cynicism at a time of economic and political crisis.[5][7] Film scholar Leonard Maltin had this to say in his book The Great Movie Comedians:As wonderful as Monkey Business, Horse Feathers, and Duck Soup seem today, some critics and moviegoers found them unpleasant and longed for the more orderly world of The Cocoanuts with its musical banalities. [...] Many right-thinkers laughed themselves silly in 1933but a large number didn't. [...] The unrelieved assault of Marxian comedy was simply too much for some people.[21]Years later, Groucho's son Arthur Marx described Irving Thalberg's assessment of the film's failure during a National Public Radio interview:[Thalberg] said the trouble with Duck Soup is you've got funny gags in it, but there's no story and there's nothing to root for. You can't root for the Marx Brothers because they're a bunch of zany kooks. [Thalberg] says, "You gotta put a love story in your movie so there'll be something to root for, and you have to help the lovers get together."[22]Most critics at the time disliked it because of its "dated" look at politics.[2][7][8] Some modern critics are also unimpressed. Christopher Null believes, "the send-up of Mussolini-types doesn't quite pan out. Take the comedy, leave the story."[23]Even Groucho himself did not initially think too highly of the film. When asked the significance of the film's politics, Groucho only shrugged and said: "What significance? We were just four Jews trying to get a laugh."[5][24] Nevertheless, the Brothers were ecstatic when Benito Mussolini took the film as a personal insult and banned it in Italy.[7][25] Also, the residents of Fredonia, New York, protested because they feared that the similar-sounding nation would hurt their city's reputation. The Marx Brothers took the opposite approach, telling them to change the name of their town to keep from hurting their movie.[26][27]Despite the tepid critical response at the time, Duck Soup is now seen as a classic political farce.[5] Film critic Danel Griffin believes that Duck Soup is "on par with other war comedies like Chaplin's The Great Dictator and Kubrick's Dr. Strangelove, only slightly more unnerving in that Duck Soup doesn't seem to realize it is anything more than innocent fluff."[8] Fellow film critic Roger Ebert believes, "The Marx Brothers created a body of work in which individual films are like slices from the whole, but Duck Soup is probably the best."[28] British film critic Barry Norman was slightly cautious about the Marx Brothers overall, but considered that Duck Soup was their best and included it in his 100 best films of the 20th century.[29]Revived interest in the film (and other 1930s comedies in general) during the 1960s was seen as dovetailing with the rebellious side of American culture in that decade.[5] American literary critic Harold Bloom considers the end of Duck Soup one of the greatest works of American art produced in the 20th century.[30]In 1990, Duck Soup was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 2000, readers of Total Film magazine voted Duck Soup the 29th greatest comedy film of all time.[5] The film also scores a 94% "fresh" rating at Rotten Tomatoes.[31] It is also one of the earliest films to appear on Roger Ebert's list of Great Movies.[28]American Film Institute lists:That the United States Library of Congress has declared Duck Soup "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" is one indication of the film's influence.[9] It is included in the original 1998 broadcast of AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies, at number 85. A decade later, for the 2007 update of the list, Duck Soup ranked even higher, at number 60.[32]Another testament to Duck Soup's legacy is its recurring influence in various Woody Allen films. For example, in Allen's Hannah and Her Sisters (1986), a chance screening of Duck Soup convinces Allen's character that life is still worth living, and he abandons his suicidal impulses.[7] Film critics have dubbed Allen's Bananas (1971), a film chronicling the humorous rise of an unlikely dictator, a "spiritual sequel to Duck Soup."[33]Duck Soup has had further lasting influence in the world of animation, with homages appearing in various animated television series. The film was spoofed in Animaniacs as the full-episode sketch "King Yakko". One specific gag from the original, the constant singing of the Fredonian national anthem, was spoofed in particular with a Perry Como caricature. Groucho's entrance in the film was borrowed in another Animaniacs cartoon, "The Three Muska-Warners".[34]The Freedonian national anthem is alluded to in the Futurama episode "Bend Her". Following Bender's victory at the Olympic Games (which he won after disguising himself as a woman to enter the women's division), he sings "Hail, hail Rob-on-i-a, a land I didn't make up!"[35]Duck Soup inspired parts of Sacha Baron Cohen's 2012 film, The Dictator.[36] An AV Club critic noted that "Admiral General Aladeen and Rufus T. Firefly share the same bloodline, representing a more generalized contempt for world leaders of any stripe, whether they don a 'supreme beard' or a greasepaint moustache."[37] The Nashville Scene detected "an echo here of that funniest of xenophobe-baiting funnies, Duck Soup."[38] The Rolling Stone claimed that Baron Cohen's film "dodges soothing convention and ultimately merits comparisons to The Marx Brothers' Duck Soup and Charlie Chaplin's The Great Dictator.[39]Universal Home Video released Duck Soup on DVD, unrestored but uncut, as part of a six-disc box set The Marx Brothers: Silver Screen Collection, which includes also the Brothers' other Paramount films, The Cocoanuts, Animal Crackers, Monkey Business, and Horse Feathers. Reviewing the set, film critic Mark Bourne writes:I've always been on the fence about this one. In my write-up, of course, I argue that even if the Marxes didn't intend any deeper significance, one still exists that its longevity has created. And of course, it's impossible to tell when Groucho is being sarcastic and when he isn't. But that he communicated with T. S. Eliot, Antonin Artaud, Dal, etc., all who praised the Brothers' work, means that he was at least aware of the various readings of the film, and he engaged them on some level. I suspect that his outspoken opinion of Duck Soup simply changed over time. While the Brothers were still active, they were infamously embarrassed by the Paramount filmshard to believe it, but there was a time when the Thalberg collaborations were actually considered better. Perhaps the 'four Jews trying to get a laugh' comment was a dismissive one he made towards that era in general. Towards the end of his lifetime, critics reexamined the Paramounts and embraced them, and perhaps this gave Groucho incentive to finally admit that the film indeed was an intentional, biting satire. But who knows? Part of the charm of the Marx Brothers is that its impossible to know where theyre channeling.November 17, 1933(1933-11-17)1 Plot

1.1 Mirror scene
1.2 Other scenes and jokes

1.1 Mirror scene1.2 Other scenes and jokes2 Cast

2.1 Cast notes

2.1 Cast notes3 Production4 Soundtrack

4.1 Original songs by Kalmar and Ruby
4.2 Non-original music

4.1 Original songs by Kalmar and Ruby4.2 Non-original music5 Reception

5.1 Influence

5.1 Influence6 DVD release7 See also8 References

8.1 Notes
8.2 Bibliography

8.1 Notes8.2 Bibliography9 External links1.1 Mirror scene1.2 Other scenes and jokes2.1 Cast notes4.1 Original songs by Kalmar and Ruby4.2 Non-original music5.1 Influence8.1 Notes8.2 BibliographyGroucho Marx as Rufus T. Firefly who, at Mrs. Teasdale's insistence, becomes the leader of Freedonia.Harpo Marx as Pinky, a spy for Sylvania who never talks.Chico Marx as Chicolini, another spy for Sylvania, one who never stops talking.Zeppo Marx as Lt. Bob Roland, Firefly's secretary.Margaret Dumont as Mrs. Gloria Teasdale, a rich widow who underwrites the budget of Freedonia.Louis Calhern as Ambassador Trentino of Sylvania who schemes to have his country take over Freedonia.Raquel Torres as Vera Marcal, a femme fatale who is working for Ambassador Trentino.Edgar Kennedy as a lemonade vendor, who is just trying to make a living.Edmund Breese as ZanderEdwin Maxwell as Former Secretary of WarWilliam Worthington as First Minister of FinanceDavison Clark as Second Minister of FinanceCharles Middleton as prosecutorLeonid Kinskey as Sylvanian agitatorGeorge MacQuarrie as first judgeFred Sullivan as second judgeEric Mayne as third judgeMilitary Polonaise (Chopin) - played over newspaper headline of Firefly's appointment as president of Freedonia"Sailor's Hornpipe"; "Dixie" - short segments embedded in "These Are the Laws of My Administration""Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf" - music box, accompanied by Harpo on (simulated) harp, briefly; a few minutes later, in another scene, Groucho says "I'll huff and I'll puff and I'll blow your door in" after he is locked in a closet"Stars and Stripes Forever" (Sousa) - on radio, turned on (loudly) by Harpo, who mistakes it for a safe"American Patrol" (Frank W. Meacham) - three of the Brothers playing soldiers' helmets like a xylophone as they march by, while Harpo clips off the decorative tassels (part of a running gag in the picture)"All God's Chillun Got Guns" (parody of "All God's Chillun Got Wings"); "Oh Freedonia" (parody of "Oh! Susanna"); "Turkey in the Straw" (instrumental) - embedded in "Freedonia's Going to War"Light Cavalry Overture (Franz von Supp) - Harpo galloping on horseback a la Paul Revere"Ain't She Sweet" (Milton Ager/Jack Yellen) - Harpo watching girl in window"Goodnight, Sweetheart" (Ray Noble) - Harpo and same girl (Edgar Kennedy's character's wife)Generic cavalry charge - Harpo with horn, in bathtub with Edgar Kennedy"One Hour With You" (Oscar Straus/Richard A. Whiting) - Harpo with another girl and his horse segu into a bit of "The Old Gray Mare"AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #85AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs - #5AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Remember, you're fighting for this woman's honor, which is probably more than she ever did." - Nominated
"I could dance with you til the cows come home. On second thought, I'd rather dance with the cows til you came home." - Nominated
RUFUS T. FIREFLY: "I suggest that we give him ten years in Levenworth, or eleven years in Twelveworth." CHICOLINI: "Ill tell you what Ill do. Ill take five and ten in Woolworth." - Nominated

"Remember, you're fighting for this woman's honor, which is probably more than she ever did." - Nominated"I could dance with you til the cows come home. On second thought, I'd rather dance with the cows til you came home." - NominatedRUFUS T. FIREFLY: "I suggest that we give him ten years in Levenworth, or eleven years in Twelveworth." CHICOLINI: "Ill tell you what Ill do. Ill take five and ten in Woolworth." - NominatedAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #60[7]"Remember, you're fighting for this woman's honor, which is probably more than she ever did." - Nominated"I could dance with you til the cows come home. On second thought, I'd rather dance with the cows til you came home." - NominatedRUFUS T. FIREFLY: "I suggest that we give him ten years in Levenworth, or eleven years in Twelveworth." CHICOLINI: "Ill tell you what Ill do. Ill take five and ten in Woolworth." - NominatedList of United States comedy filmsKalmar and Ruby songwriting teamNational Recovery Administration (NRA), the logo displayed at start of filmBlount, Jr., Roy (2010). Hail, Hail, Euphoria: Presenting the Marx Brothers in Duck Soup, the Greatest War Movie Ever Made. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN0-06-180816-4.Doherty, Thomas (1999). Pre-Code Hollywood: Sex, Immorality, and Insurrection in American Cinema, 1930-1934. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN??.Kanfer, Stefan (2001 (reprint)). Groucho: The Life and Times of Julius Henry Marx. New York: Vintage (Random House). ISBN0-375-70207-5.Louvish, Simon (2000). Monkey Business: The Lives and Legends of the Marx Brothers. New York: Thomas Dunne Books. ISBN??.Maltin, Leonard (1982 (reprint)). The Great Movie Comedians: From Charlie Chaplin to Woody Allen. New York: Bell Publishing Company. ISBN0-517-36184-1.Duck Soup at the Internet Movie DatabaseDuck Soup at AllRoviDuck Soup at Rotten TomatoesFull review of Duck Soup from Filmsite.orgCredit summary with "Four Marx Brothers" poster from a University of Illinois at Chicago websitePresent at the Creation, an NPR story about the failure of Duck Soup and the success of the film that followedRice's Recipe for Duck Soup, contemporary relevance as political referenceA Night at the Opera is a 1935 American comedy film starring Groucho Marx, Chico Marx and Harpo Marx, and featuring Kitty Carlisle, Allan Jones, Margaret Dumont, Sig Ruman, and Walter Woolf King. It was the first film the Marx Brothers made for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer after their departure from Paramount Pictures, and the first after Zeppo left the act. The film was adapted by George S. Kaufman, Morrie Ryskind, and Al Boasberg (uncredited) from a story by James Kevin McGuinness. It was directed by Sam Wood.A smash hit at the box office, A Night at the Opera was selected in 1993 for preservation in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".[3] It is also included in the 2007 update of AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies, at number 85; and previously in AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs 2000 showing, at number 12.In A Night At the Opera, the Marx brothers help two young lovers to succeed in love as well as in the opera world. Otis B. Driftwood (Groucho Marx) is hired by widowed socialite hopeful Mrs. Claypool (Margaret Dumont) to help her break into high society, but he instead alternately woos and insults her. At the last opera performance of the season in Italy, of Pagliacci, Otis meets Fiorello (Chico Marx), who is the best friend and manager of Riccardo (Allan Jones), an opera singer who longs for his big break and who is in love with fellow opera singer Rosa (Kitty Carlisle). However, Riccardo's dreams are thwarted by the star of the opera, Lassparri (Walter Woolf King), an egotistical man who wants fameand Rosafor himself. Otis signs Riccardo to a contract, thinking he is signing Lassparri (because Fiorello said he was the manager of the best opera singer in the world, making Otis think Ricarrdo was Lassparii); Lassparri, meanwhile, is signed for the New York opera by the manager of the opera company, Herman Gottlieb (Sig Ruman).Although Riccardo and Fiorello are not allowed to accompany the troupe on their trip to New York, they manage to stow away on the ship, hiding in Otis's trunk, along with another of Fiorello's friends, Tomasso (Harpo Marx), a dresser who got fired by Lassparri (after he caught Tommaso wearing his costumes). In New York, to protect their identities, the three stowaways pretend to be three famous aviators. They are forced to make a speech, however, since Harpo is mute, he fails to do so, causing people to get suspicious. Tommaso's identity is quickly revealed when his fake beard falls off. They hide in Otis's apartment after escaping. Otis finds out from a newspaper that the stowaways are being pursued by the police for entering the country illegally. Otis ends up losing his position with the opera to Gottlieb. When they find out that Rosa has been fired for siding with Riccardo, the boys spring into action, sabotaging the opening night performance of Il Trovatore by throwing it into total chaos. With the police and Gottlieb after him, Tommaso turns off the lights. While the lights are off, Lassparri and Otis end up in a box. Tommaso pulls the box up before the lights turn on. Finding that Lassparri has disappeared, Gottlieb desperately asks Riccarrdo and Rosa to sing. As they finish singing, the box Otis and Lassparri are in drops to the ground. Lassparri tries to perform, only to be booed by the audience. Riccardo and Rosa once again sing.The film ends with Otis and Fiorello telling Gottlieb that because they signed the contract, they get ten percent each from the profit Ricarrdo and Rosa make from singing.Driftwood plans a rendezvous with Mrs. Claypool in his stateroom; then he finds out how small it is, and that he, his trunk, and the bed barely fit in it. Fiorello insists on getting something to eat ("We getta food or we don't go"). So Driftwood calls a steward ("I say, Stew") and orders dinner.Driftwood: And two medium-boiled eggs.
Fiorello: (inside room): And two hard-boiled eggs.
Driftwood: And two hard-boiled eggs.
Tomasso: (inside room): (honk)
Driftwood: Make that three hard boiled eggs.This continues until Fiorello and Tomasso have ordered about a dozen hard-boiled eggs and Driftwood has ordered about everything elseincluding coffee to sober up some stewed prunes. However, this is just to set the viewer up for the famous "Stateroom Scene", which sees a total of 15 people in Driftwood's tiny ship's cabin, already containing a bed and a big wardrobe trunk. It is one of the most famous comedy scenes of all time.[4]The scene starts with Driftwood finding out that Fiorello, Tomasso, and Riccardo Baroni managed to sneak onto the boat by stowing away in his steamer trunk. Fiorello and Tomasso have to hide out in the room while a parade of people walk in, asking to either use their cabin for something, or to perform their appointed tasks. Crammed into this little space at the end of the scene are: Driftwood, Fiorello, Tomasso, Baroni, two cleaning ladies who make up the bed, a manicurist, a ship's engineer and his assistant, a girl looking for her aunt, a maid ("I come to mop up." "You'll have to start on the ceiling.") and four waiters with trays of food (prompting Driftwood's classic line: "Is it my imagination, or is it getting crowded in here?"). The mass of humanity tumbles out into the hallway when Mrs. Claypool opens the door.The contract scene between Driftwood and Fiorello ("the party of the first part ..."):Fiorello: Hey, wait, wait. What does this say here, this thing here?
Driftwood: Oh, that? Oh, that's the usual clause that's in every contract. That just says, uh, it says, uh, if any of the parties participating in this contract are shown not to be in their right mind, the entire agreement is automatically nullified.
Fiorello: Well, I don't know...
Driftwood: It's all right. That's, that's in every contract. That's, that's what they call a sanity clause.
Fiorello: Ha-ha-ha-ha-ha! You can't fool me. There ain't no Sanity Clause!In an interview with Richard J. Anobile in The Marx Brothers Scrapbook, Groucho said he was so appalled by an early draft of the scriptwhich was reportedly written by Burt Kalmar and Harry Rubythat he screamed, "Why fuck around with second-rate talent? Get Kaufman and Ryskind [to write the screenplay]!"[citation needed]At the suggestion of producer Irving Thalberg, the film marked a change of direction in the brothers' career. In their Paramount films, the brothers' characters were much more anarchic: they attacked anybody who was so unfortunate to cross their paths whether they deserved it or not, albeit comically. Thalberg, however, felt that this made the brothers unsympathetic, particularly to female filmgoers. So in the MGM films, the brothers were recast as more helpful characters, saving their comic attacks for the villains.Though some Marx Brothers fans were appalled at these changes, Thalberg was vindicated when the film became a solid hit. It helped that the film contained some of what fans consider to be the brothers' funniest routines. These routines were honed on stage, as the brothers performed the new material on the road before filming began.However, according to Oscar Levant, the first preview was a "disaster", with "hardly a laugh" as was the second. Thalberg and George S. Kaufman spent days in the editing room, adjusting the timing to match the rhythm of a stage performance. About nine minutes was cut from the running time, and the result was a hit.[5]True to its title, the film actually includes adaptations of some real opera scenes, especially from Il Trovatore, with a duet sung by Kitty Carlisle and Allan Jones. The opera setting also allowed MGM to add big production song numbers (which were one of this studio's specialties), such as the song Alone, with the departure of the steamship, and the song Cosi Cosa with the Italian buffet and dancing.Kitty Carlisle and Allan Jones, who were both trained in classical singing, sing for themselves in the movie. Walter Woolf King was also trained in classical singing, but he was a baritone, and the music for his character in Il Trovatore was written for a tenor. His aria, Di quella pira, was sung by New York Metropolitan tenor Tandy MacKenzie.The film originally was to have begun with each of the Marx Brothers taking turns roaring instead of Leo the Lion (MGM's iconic mascot); Harpo Marx was to have honked his horn. For reasons unexplained, this unique opening was not used in the released film, although it would turn up years later in a re-release trailer.[6][7]According to MGM's dialogue cutting continuity and Leonard Maltin's audio commentary on the current DVD release, the film originally began (after the opening credits) with the image of a "boat on canal". A superimposed title read, "ITALY - WHERE THEY SING ALL DAY AND GO TO THE OPERA AT NIGHT", and was followed by a musical number featuring bits and pieces from Leoncavallo's Pagliacci performed by "everyday" Italians: a street sweeper sings part of the prologue ("Un nido di memorie...") as he greets a man who then hands out opera tickets to a group of children emerging from a store; the children respond with "la-la-la-la-la, verso un paese strano" (from "Stridono lass"); a "captain" comes down a set of steps, salutes a sentry, then bursts into "Vesti la giubba"; then, a lap dissolve into a hotel lobby, where a "baggage man" is rolling a trunk and crooning about "nettare divino" ("divine nectar"); a waiter joins the baggage man in song, enters the dining room, and sings as he serves a man who for a few notes also sings; the waiter then crosses the dining room to speak to Mrs. Claypool (Margaret Dumont), marking the beginning of the film in existing copies. Maltin[8] stated the scene was cut during World War II to remove references to Italy, and unfortunately, the main negative was cut as well, so the scene is now lost.[9] This notable cut, with several other small ones made at about the same time, is why the stated running time of the film (95 minutes) was three minutes longer than that of existing prints.[6]A persistent rumor concerning A Night at the Opera involves the presence of the Marx brothers' father Sam Marx (also known as "Frenchy") on the ship and on the dock, waving goodbye. Both Groucho and Harpo stated this as fact in their memoirs,[10][11] and Leonard Maltin repeats it in the DVD commentary. But this could not have occurred, because Sam Marx had died in 1933, during pre-production of Duck Soup, two years before A Night at the Opera was released.[7] The rumor arose because Frenchy had had such a cameo appearance in the Marx brothers' earlier Monkey Business. There is, however, a reference to the Marx brothers' mother, Minnie Marx, during the stateroom scene, in which a woman asks, "Is my Aunt Minnie in here?"[6]Part of the concept of casting the Marx brothers as stowaways on a ship was recycled from Monkey Business. As Groucho Marx's and Margaret Dumont's characters are boarding the ocean liner, Dumont asks Groucho, "Do you have everything, Otis?"; Groucho replies, "Well, I haven't had any complaints yet." In two different interviews with Dick Cavett on The Dick Cavett Show - Comic Legends DVD, Groucho claimed that that exchange of dialogue was banned in a majority of states when the film was released because it was too suggestive, although the number of states varied with different tellings of the story.In 2008, a film student reported that the Hungarian National Film Archive possesses a longer print of the film.[12] While the print does not contain the opening musical number, it does contain several excised lines referencing Italy that had been cut upon the film's re-release in the 1940s. With the opening number still missing, it may be that this scene was cut after its original preview screenings during the 1930s rather than during its re-release, as previously thought. However, the discovery of the Hungarian print has not yet been independently verified, and Warner Brothers, who owns the rights to the film, has not indicated that any restoration is forthcoming.In the scene where the three stowaways are impersonating Russian aviators, Driftwood seems to talk gibberish with the dignitaries. As a matter of fact, it is English; if played backwards, it can be heard what they are saying ("This man is accusing you of being impostors", etc.). It was recorded normally, then reversed and dubbed over the scene in post-production.[4]A Night at the Opera began a new era for the Marx Brothers' style of comedy. Whereas their previous comedies at Paramount Pictures consisted of a constant barrage of zany, free-for-all jokes sandwiched in between something resembling a plot, A Night at the Opera was calculated comedy. Producer Irving Thalberg insisted on a strong story structure, making the Brothers more sympathetic characters, interweaving their comedy with romantic plots and non-comic spectacular musical numbers. The targets of their mischief were largely confined to clear villains. Thalberg's logic was that the Marxes could get "twice the box office with half the laughs," believing their films would attract a wider audience.[13]Another idea of Thalberg's was that before filming would commence on an upcoming picture, the Marx Brothers would try out its material on the vaudeville stage, working on comic timing and learning what earned a laugh and what did not. He was keen to plant gags accordingly so the laughs could be timed correctly.[13] Interestingly enough, the famous "stateroom" scene was nearly eliminated because it was not getting any laughs. One evening the Marx Brothers threw away the script and ad-libbed the whole thing. As a result, a weak scene was transformed into one of their all-time classics.In A Night at the Opera, the Brothers' characters were refined. Groucho made more sense, and less trouble. Chico gained intelligence, and Harpo regressed into more of a child. The film dives straight into a plot and accompanying comedy, with every scene having a definitive beginning, middle, and end. The end consisted of a grand finale in traditional MGM musical fashion, something lacking from the Brothers' Paramount efforts, which would consist of gag upon gag without a satisfactory payoff.[13]Perhaps most notably, A Night at the Opera established a formula that would be used for every subsequent film the Marx Brothers made at MGM:A Night at the Opera is widely regarded as a classic and is arguably (along with Duck Soup) the Marx Brothers' most-recognized film. As of October 18, 2008, the film scores a 97% "fresh" rating at Rotten Tomatoes.[14] Internet reviews take a revisionist approach and suggest that the film is "a very funny movie slowed down by MGMs expensive production values and idiotic songs."[14] Ken Hanke calls it "hysterical, but not up to the boys Paramount films."[14] Mark Bourne concurs: "[The Marx Brothers] still let the air out of stuffed shirts and barbecue a few sacred cows, but something got lost in all that MGMness when the screen's ultimate anti-authoritarian team starting working the Andy Hardy side of the street."[14]Roger Ebert admits that, while A Night at the Opera "contains some of their best work," he "fast-forward[s] over the sappy interludes involving Kitty Carlisle and Allan Jones. In Duck Soup there are no sequences I can skip; the movie is funny from beginning to end."[15]Danel Griffin says: "A Night at the Opera is funny, but this is NOT the Marx Brothers, and their earlier style is so sorely missed that the film falls flat. The main problem with A Night at the Opera is the obvious lack of the Marx Brothers trademark anarchy. What distinguished them in their Paramount films from all other comedians was their thumb-biting indictment of society.[16]American Film Institute ListsNovember 15, 1935(1935-11-15)1 Plot2 Selected scenes

2.1 Stateroom scene
2.2 Contract scene

2.1 Stateroom scene2.2 Contract scene3 Cast4 Production

4.1 Opera
4.2 Subsequent re-editing
4.3 Hungarian rediscovery
4.4 Hidden material

4.1 Opera4.2 Subsequent re-editing4.3 Hungarian rediscovery4.4 Hidden material5 Musical numbers6 Style change7 Reputation and legacy8 In popular culture9 See also10 Notes11 References12 External links2.1 Stateroom scene2.2 Contract scene4.1 Opera4.2 Subsequent re-editing4.3 Hungarian rediscovery4.4 Hidden materialGroucho Marx as Otis B. DriftwoodHarpo Marx as TomassoChico Marx as FiorelloKitty Carlisle as Rosa CastaldiAllan Jones as Ricardo BaroniMargaret Dumont as Mrs. ClaypoolSiegfried Rumann as Herman GottliebWalter Woolf King as Rodolfo LassparriRobert Emmett O'Connor as Sergeant HendersonEdward Keane as The CaptainPurnell Pratt as The Mayor"Alone" (Nacio Herb Brown and Arthur Freed)"Santa Lucia""All I Do Is Dream of You""Cosi-Cosa""Take Me Out to the Ballgame"Prelude to Il Trovatore"Anvil Chorus" (from Il trovatore)"Stride la vampa" (from Il trovatore)"Di quella Pira" (from Il trovatore)"Miserere", (From Il trovatore)"Stridono lass" (from Pagliacci)opening scene with Grouchoa friendship created between the romantic hero and ChicoChico and Groucho going through several verbal routinesHarpo joining as Chico's partnerlush surroundings as a backdrop to the Brothers' lunacya fall from gracea rebound on a grand scale in which everything is righted[13]AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - NominatedAFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs - #12AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes - Nominated:AFI's Greatest Movie MusicalsAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #85The Belgian singer Jacques Brel was inspired by the famous stateroom gag in the film when he wrote his song "Le Gaz" (1967) which depicts several men all crowding together in one room to meet a courtesan "for the gas."[17]Cyndi Lauper featured a similar overcrowded stateroom gag in her music video for the song "Girls Just Want To Have Fun".Sting also recreated the overcrowded stateroom gag in his music video for the 1991 song "All This Time".The Warner Bros. animated show Animaniacs also paid homage to the stateroom gag in the short "Hercule Yakko".Though not one room, Mr. Mom also paid an homage to the stateroom gag in its finale.In the Disney Channel series The Suite Life of Zack & Cody, a scene almost identical to the stateroom scene occurs in the Martins' closet.An 8th season episode of Seinfeld titled "The Pothole" features a homage to the stateroom scene in which the four main characters all cram into a small janitor's closet that Elaine is using to get Chinese food delivered; they all end up spilling out after Kramer spills ammonia.Mystery writer Jeffrey Cohen paid tribute to the stateroom scene in his novel A Night at the Operation (2009). The book's title also parodies the name of the movie.The British punk band The Damned used Chico's quote ("There ain't no sanity clause") as a title for a 1980 single.Detective Comics #826 pays homage to the film. In it the Joker captures Tim Drake, the third Robin, and takes him on a mad spree in a car, running over anyone they encounter over the Christmas season. When the Joker plans to kill a street Santa Claus, Robin distracts him by saying "You can't fool me. There ain't no Sanity Claus." The Joker laughs and the two get in an argument over which Marx Brothers film the gag is from, with Robin claiming it is from The Big Store. The Joker is distracted long enough for Robin to punch him out and escape. The Joker himself uses the line in The Killing Joke.The British rock group Queen paid homage to this film by naming one of their most famous albums after it.The film's script is credited as the basis for the 1992 film Brain Donors, produced by David Zucker and Jerry Zucker of Airplane! and The Naked Gun fame.At the end of the 1990 film The Freshman, Rodolfo Lassparri is the alias used on Matthew Broderick's passport.The German power metal band Blind Guardian paid homage to this film by naming one of their albums after it.List of United States comedy films"Cosi cosa" composers: Bronisaw Kaper and Walter JurmannElisabeth Buxbaum: Veronika, der Lenz ist da. Walter Jurmann  Ein Musiker zwischen den Welten und Zeiten. Mit einem Werkverzeichnis von Alexander Sieghardt. Edition Steinbauer, Wien 2006, ISBN 3-902494-18-2Marx Brothers Night at the Opera TreasuryMarx-Brothers.orgA Night at the Opera at the Internet Movie DatabaseA Night at the Opera at the TCM Movie DatabaseA Night at the Opera at AllRoviFull description of A Night at the Opera from Filmsite.orgMutiny on the Bounty is a 1935 film starring Charles Laughton and Clark Gable, and directed by Frank Lloyd based on the Charles Nordhoff and James Norman Hall novel Mutiny on the Bounty.The film was one of the biggest hits of its time. Although its historical accuracy has been questioned (inevitable as it is based on a novel about the facts, not the facts themselves), film critics consider this adaptation to be the best cinematic work inspired by the mutiny.The HMS Bounty leaves England in 1787 on a two-year voyage into the Pacific Ocean. The ship's captain, William Bligh (Charles Laughton) is a brutal tyrant who routinely administers harsh punishment to the officers and crew alike that either lack discipline, cause any infraction on board the ship or defy his authority. Fletcher Christian (Clark Gable), the ship's lieutenant, is a formidable, yet compassionate man who disapproves of Bligh's treatment of the crew. Roger Byam (Franchot Tone) is an idealistic midshipman, who is divided between his loyalty to Bligh, due to his family's Naval tradition, and his friendship to Christian.During the voyage, the enmity between Christian and Bligh grows after Christian openly challenges Bligh's unjust practices aboard the ship. When the ship arrives on the island of Tahiti, where the crew acquire breadfruit plant to take home, Bligh punishes Christian by refusing to let him leave the ship during their stay. Byam, meanwhile, sets up residency on the island, living with the island Chief, Hitihiti (William Bambridge), and his daughter, Tehanni (Movita Castaneda), and translating an English dictionary of the Tahitian language. Hitihiti persuades Bligh to allow Christian a day pass on the island. Bligh agrees but quickly repeals the pass out of spite. Christian disregards the order and spends his one day off the ship romancing a local Tahitian girl named Miamiti (Mamo Clark). Christian promises her he will be back someday.After leaving Tahiti, the crew begin to talk of mutinty after Bligh's harsh discipline leads to the death of the ship's beloved surgeon, Mr Bacchus (Dudley Digges) and he cuts water rationing to the crew in favor of providing water for the acquired breadfruit plants. Christian, although initially opposing the idea, decides he can no longer tolerate Bligh's brutality when he witnesses crew members shackled in iron chains, and approves the mutiny. The crew raid the weapons cabinet and seize the ship. Bligh and his loyalists are cast into a boat and set adrift at sea with a map and rations to ensure their survival. Due to Bligh's steady leadership, they are able to find their way back to land.Meanwhile, Christian orders the HMS Bounty return to Tahiti. Byam, who was in his cabin during the mutiny, disapproves of what Christian has done and decides the two can no longer be friends. Months later, Byam is married to Tehanni, Christian has married Miamiti and has a child with her, while the rest of the crew are enjoying their freedom on the island. After a long estrangement, Byam and Christian reconcile their friendship. However, when the British ship, HMS Pandora, is spotted approaching, Byam and Christian decide they must part ways. Byam and several crew members remain on the island for the ship to take them back to England while Christian leads the remaining crew, his wife, and several Tahiti men and women, back on board the Bounty in search of a new island to seek refuge on.Byam boards the Pandora and, much to his surprise, discovers that Bligh is the captain. Bligh, who suspects Byam was complicit in the mutiny, has him imprisoned for the remainder of the journey across the sea. Back in England, Byam is court-martialed and found guilty of mutiny. Before the court condemns him, Byam speaks of Bligh's cruel, dehumanising conduct abord the Bounty. Due to the intervention of his friend, Sir Joseph Banks (Henry Stephenson) and Lord Hood (David Torrence), Byam is pardoned by the court and allowed to resume his Naval career at sea.Meanwhile, Christian has found Pitcairn, an unihabitated yet sustainable island, which he believes will provide adequate refuge from the reach of the British Empire. The Bounty crashes on the rocks and Christian orders it to be burned.The movie contains several historical inaccuracies. Captain Bligh was never on board HMS Pandora, nor was he present at the trial of the mutineers who stayed on Tahiti. At the time he was halfway around the world on a second voyage for breadfruit plants. Fletcher Christian's father had died many years before Christian's travels on board the Bounty - the film shows the elder Christian at the trial. It should be noted though, that the movie was always presented as an adaptation of the Nordhoff and Hall trilogy, which already differed from the actual story of the mutiny.Bligh is depicted as a brutal, sadistic disciplinarian. Particular episodes include a keelhauling and flogging a dead man. Neither of these happened. Keelhauling was used rarely, if at all, and had been abandoned long before Bligh's time. Indeed the meticulous record of the Bounty's log reveals that the flogging rate was lower than the average for that time. Prior to the mutiny the Bounty had only two deathsone seaman died of scurvy (not keelhauling) and the ship's surgeon died apparently of drink and indolence and not as a result of abuse by Bligh. Likewise the film shows the mutineers taking over the ship only after killing several loyal crewmen when in fact none died although one crewman came very close to shooting Bligh until stopped by Christian. Lastly Christian is shown being inspired to take over the ship after several crewmen have unjustly been put into irons by Bligh; this is fictional license.For historical accuracy, Clark Gable reluctantly had to shave off his famous moustache because the sailors in the Royal Navy in the 18th century had to be clean-shaven.In the final scene of the film Gable gives a rousing speech to his fellow mutineers speaking of creating a perfect society of free men on Pitcairn away from Bligh and the Navy. The reality was very different. Free from the restraints of Naval discipline the mutineers proved incapable of self-government. Pitcairn degenerated into a place of drunkenness, rape and murder. Apart from John Adams and Ned Young all the mutineers (including Christian) perished, most of them by violence.Midshipman Roger Byam was based on a real person Midshipman Peter Heywood who is not listed in the novel or motion picture. Just as the fictional Byam is pardoned at the end of the film the real life Peter Heywood was also pardoned for his part in the mutiny. 1935 MGM Trailers made an error calling Midshipman Byam an Ensign.Mutineer Thomas Ellison is depicted as being allowed to see his wife before his execution. There is no record to indicate that the real Ellison was married, and in any case a consolation visit of this type never would have been permitted in real life.Hollywood star James Cagney (then on a hiatus from Warner Bros. during a contract dispute) and future stars David Niven and Dick Haymes were uncredited extras in the movie. Cagney is clearly visible toward the beginning of the film.Charles Laughton, who had a severe self-image complex concerning his weight and unattractive looks, suffered horribly in comparing himself to the handsome, masculine Clark Gable.[2] Laughton would constantly watch his own walk, gestures, and face, making sure to not let his complex be projected.[2]This film is, as of 2011, the last Best Picture winner to win in no other category.American Film Institute recognitionA 1962 three-hours-plus widescreen Technicolor remake, starring Marlon Brando as Fletcher Christian and Trevor Howard as Captain Bligh, was a disaster both critically and financially at the time, but has come to be reevaluated by critics. In 1984, Mel Gibson played Christian opposite Anthony Hopkins as Bligh in a lavish remake called The Bounty. This latest version, which gives a far more sympathetic view of Bligh, is considered to be the closest to historical events.The 1935 version was itself not the first film account of the mutiny. In 1933, an Australian film entitled In the Wake of the Bounty, with the then-unknown Errol Flynn as Fletcher Christian, was released, but was not successful and received few bookings outside of Australia. There was also an even earlier film, the 1916 AustralianNew Zealand film, The Mutiny on the Bounty directed by Raymond LongfordNovember 8, 1935(1935-11-08)1 Plot2 Historical inaccuracies3 Cast4 Production

4.1 Filming locations

4.1 Filming locations5 Awards and honors

5.1 Academy Awards
5.2 Other honors

5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Other honors6 Gallery7 Remakes8 Parodies9 References10 External links4.1 Filming locations5.1 Academy Awards5.2 Other honorsCharles Laughton as Captain BlighClark Gable as Fletcher ChristianFranchot Tone as ByamHerbert Mundin as SmithEddie Quillan as EllisonDudley Digges as BacchusDonald Crisp as BurkittHenry Stephenson as Sir Joseph BanksFrancis Lister as Captain NelsonSpring Byington as Mrs. ByamMovita Castaneda as Tehani (as Movita)Mamo Clark as Maimiti (as Mamo)Byron Russell as QuintalPercy Waram as ColemanDavid Torrence as Lord HoodJohn Harrington as Mr. PurcellDouglas Walton as StewartIan Wolfe as MaggsDeWitt Jennings as FryerIvan F. Simpson as Morgan (as Ivan Simpson)Vernon Downing as HaywardBill Bambridge as Hitihiti (as William Bambridge)Marion Clayton Anderson as Mary Ellison (as Marion Clayton)Stanley Fields as MusprattWallis Clark as MorrisonCrauford Kent as Lieutenant Edwards (as Craufurd Kent)Pat Flaherty as ChurchillAlec Craig as McCoyCharles Irwin as ThompsonDick Winslow as TinklerSam Wallace Driscoll as Byrne (Uncredited)James Cagney as Extra (Uncredited)David Niven as Extra (Uncredited)Edward "Ted" Reed as Extra (Uncredited)French PolynesiaMetro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios - 10202 W. Washington Blvd., Culver City, California, USA (studio)Monterey Bay, Monterey, California, USAMonterey Harbor, Monterey, California, USASailing Ship Restaurant, Pier 42, The Embarcadero, San Francisco, California, USA (ship "Ellen" as "The Bounty")San Miguel Island, California, USASanta Barbara Channel, Channel Islands, California, USASanta Catalina Island, Channel Islands, California, USASouth Beach Harbor, South Beach, San Francisco, California, USA (ship "Ellen" as "The Bounty")South Pacific, Pacific OceanTahiti, French PolynesiaAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #86AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Captain Bligh, Villain #19

Captain Bligh, Villain #19Captain Bligh, Villain #19


























































































Friz Freleng's cartoon Mutiny on the Bunny casts Yosemite Sam (called Shanghai Sam) as a foul-tempered skipper who shanghais Bugs Bunny, only to see Bugs rebel. Also, in one scene in Freleng's earlier Buccaneer Bunny, Bugs dresses up as Capt. Bligh (including a visual and vocal impression of Charles Laughton) and barks out orders to Sam (called Seagoin' Sam).The 1967 Lost in Space episode "Mutiny in Space" features Ronald Long imitating Charles Laughton in the role of spaceship captain "Admiral Zahrk."In The Simpsons episode "The Wettest Stories Ever Told" features the family telling stories set on ships. The second segment is a parody on Mutiny on the Bounty and casts Principal Skinner as Capt. Bligh, brutalizing the crew members (played by Bart, Milhouse, Martin, Nelson, Jimbo, Dolph and Kearney).Mutiny on the Bounty (1935) at the Internet Movie DatabaseMutiny on the Bounty at the TCM Movie DatabaseMutiny on the Bounty (1935 film) at AllRoviMutiny on the Bounty at Rotten TomatoesSouthseascinema.orgFrankenstein is a 1931 horror monster film from Universal Pictures directed by James Whale and adapted from the play by Peggy Webling, which in turn is based on the novel of the same name by Mary Shelley. The film stars Colin Clive, Mae Clarke, John Boles and Boris Karloff and features Dwight Frye and Edward van Sloan. The Webling play was adapted by John L. Balderston and the screenplay written by Francis Edward Faragoh and Garrett Fort with uncredited contributions from Robert Florey and John Russell. The make-up artist was Jack Pierce. A huge hit with both audiences and critics, the film was followed by multiple sequels and became one of the most iconic horror films in movie history.Henry Frankenstein (Colin Clive), an ardent young scientist, and his devoted assistant Fritz (Dwight Frye), a hunchback, piece together a human body, the parts of which have been secretly collected from various sources. Frankenstein's consuming desire is to create human life through various electrical devices which he has perfected.Elizabeth (Mae Clarke), his fiance, is worried to distraction over his peculiar actions. She cannot understand why he secludes himself in an abandoned watch tower, which he has equipped as a laboratory, refusing to see anyone. She and her friend, Victor Moritz (John Boles), go to Dr. Waldman (Edward Van Sloan), his old medical professor, and ask Dr. Waldman's help in reclaiming the young scientist from his absorbing experiments. Waldman tells them that Frankenstein has been working on creating life. Elizabeth, intent on rescuing Frankenstein, arrives just as Henry is making his final tests. He tells them to watch, claiming to have discovered the ray that brought life into the world. They all watch Frankenstein and the hunchback as they raise the dead creature on an operating table, high into the room, toward an opening at the top of the laboratory. Then a terrific crash of thunder, the crackling of Frankenstein's electric machines, and the hand of Frankenstein's monster (Boris Karloff) begins to move. This causes Frankenstein to shout 'It's alive!'Through the incompetence of Fritz, a criminal brain was secured for Frankenstein's experiments instead of the desired normal one. The manufactured monster, despite its grotesque form, initially appears not to be a malevolent beast but a simple, innocent creation. Frankenstein welcomes it into his laboratory and asks his creation to sit, which it does. He then opens up the roof, causing the monster to reach out towards the sunlight. Fritz, however, enters with a flaming torch, which frightens the monster. Its fright is mistaken by Frankenstein and Dr. Waldman as an attempt to attack them, and so it is taken to the dungeon where it is chained. Thinking that it is not fit for society and will wreak havoc at any chance, they leave the monster locked up, where Fritz antagonizes it with a torch. As Henry and Dr. Waldman consider the fate of the monster, they hear a shriek from the dungeon. Frankenstein and Dr. Waldman rush in to find the monster has strangled Fritz. The monster makes a lunge at the two but they escape the dungeon, locking the monster inside. Realizing that the creature must be destroyed, Henry prepares an injection of a powerful drug and the two conspire to release the monster and inject it as it attacks. When the door is unlocked the creature emerges and lunges at Frankenstein as Dr. Waldman injects the drug into the creature's back. The monster knocks Dr. Waldman to the floor and has nearly killed Henry when the drug takes effect, and he falls to the floor unconscious.Henry leaves to prepare for his wedding while Dr. Waldman conducts an examination of the unconscious creature. As he is preparing to begin dissecting it, the creature awakens and strangles him. It escapes from the tower and wanders through the landscape. It then has a short encounter with a farmer's young daughter, Maria (Marilyn Harris), who asks him to play a game with her in which they playfully toss flowers into a lake and watch them float. The monster enjoys the game, but when they run out of flowers, tragedy occurs. Due to his defective brain, the monster thinks Maria (unable to swim) will float as well as the flowers, so he picks her up and throws her into the lake, and the girl drowns. Realizing he has made a terrible mistake, the monster walks away feeling troubled and remorseful. This drowning scene is one of the most controversial in the film, with a long history of censorship.With preparations for the wedding completed, Frankenstein is once again himself and serenely happy with Elizabeth. They are to marry as soon as Dr. Waldman arrives. Victor rushes in, saying that the Doctor has been found strangled in his operating room. Frankenstein suspects the monster. A chilling scream convinces him that the monster is in the house. When the searchers arrive, they find Elizabeth unconscious on the bed. The monster has escaped. He is intent only upon destroying Frankenstein.Meanwhile, Maria's father arrives, carrying the body of his daughter. He says she was murdered, and an enraged band of peasants search the surrounding country for the monster. They are split into three groups, Frankenstein leading one into the mountains. He becomes separated from the band and is discovered by the monster who, after the two stare each other down for a curious moment, attacks him. After a struggle, in which Frankenstein's torch fails to save him, the monster knocks Frankenstein unconscious and carries him off to the old mill. The peasants hear his cries and follow. Upon reaching the mill, they find the monster has climbed to the very top, dragging Frankenstein with him. In a burst of rage, he hurls the young scientist to the ground. His fall is broken by the vanes of the windmill, saving him from instant death. Some of the villagers hurry him to his home while the others remain to burn the mill and destroy the entrapped monster.Later, back at Castle Frankenstein, Frankenstein's father, Baron Frankenstein (Frederick Kerr) celebrates the wedding of his recovered son with a toast to a future grandchild.The film begins with Edward Van Sloan stepping from behind a curtain and delivering a "friendly warning" before the opening credits:We are about to unfold the story of Frankenstein, a man of science who sought to create a man after his own image without reckoning upon God. It is one of the strangest tales ever told. It deals with the two great mysteries of creation  life and death. I think it will thrill you. It may shock you. It might even  horrify you. So if any of you feel that you do not care to subject your nerves to such a strain, now's your chance to  uh, well, we warned you.In the opening credits, Karloff is unbilled, with only a question mark being used in place of his name. This is a nod to a tradition of theatrical adaptations billing the monster without a name. Karloff's name is revealed in the closing credits, which otherwise duplicate the credits from the opening under the motto that "A Good Cast Is Worth Repeating."There was controversy around this point originally, as some part of the management of Universal built up the suspense of who was playing the creature to gather interest in the film as Bela Lugosi was still largely thought to be performing the role of the creature up until the time of the film's release. Some papers were erroneously still listing Lugosi as the performer. Some were coming to see if Lugosi had changed his mind and recanted about starring in the film, despite some published statements to the contrary, most notably the still-famous "electric beam eyes" poster, which still credited Lugosi as the monster and showed the creature without the now-famous flat head, neck-bolt makeup created by Universal Studios make-up artist Jack Pierce. Pierce also created Lon Chaney's Wolf Man make-up and Karloff's Mummy make-up. Others state it was because the film would cause the ruin of the performer in the role and wanted to minimize said actor's liability,[citation needed] for the original film went against the censor boards of the day.Bela Lugosi was originally set to star as the monster.[3] After several disastrous make-up tests, the Dracula star left the project. Although this is often regarded as one of the worst decisions of Lugosi's career, in actuality, the part that Lugosi was offered was not the same character that Karloff eventually played. The character in the Florey script was simply a killing machine without a touch of human interest or pathos, reportedly causing Lugosi to complain, "I was a star in my country[4] and I will not be a scarecrow over here!"[5] However, the decision may not have been Lugosi's in any case, since recent evidence suggests that he was kicked off the project, along with director Robert Florey. Lugosi would later go on to play the monster in Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man a decade later, when his career was in decline and only after Lon Chaney, Jr. refused to play both the Wolfman and the Monster in the film for about the same pay rate. Chaney had previously appeared as the Monster in the previous Frankenstein film Ghost of Frankenstein,.Actors who worked on the project were or became familiar to fans of the Universal horror films. These included Frederick Kerr as the old Baron Frankenstein, Henry's father; Lionel Belmore as Herr Vogel, the Brgermeister; Marilyn Harris as Little Maria, the girl the monster accidentally kills; and Michael Mark as Ludwig, Maria's father.Jack Pierce was the makeup artist who designed the now-iconic "flat head" look for Karloff's monster, although Whale's contribution in the form of sketches remains a controversy, and who was actually responsible for the idea of the look will probably always be a mystery.Kenneth Strickfaden designed the electrical effects used in the "creation scene." So successful were they that such effects came to be considered an essential part of every subsequent Universal film involving the Frankenstein Monster. Accordingly, the equipment used to produce them has come to be referred to in fan circles as "Strickfadens." It appears that Strickfaden managed to secure the use of at least one Tesla Coil built by the then-aged Nikola Tesla himself.[6] According to this same source, Strickfaden also doubled for Karloff in the electrical "birth" scene, as Karloff was deathly afraid of being electrocuted from the live voltage on the stage.There is no musical soundtrack in the film, except for the opening and closing credits.The film opened in New York City at the Mayfair Theatre on December 4, 1931, and grossed $53,000 in one week.[5]The scene in which the monster throws the little girl into the lake and accidentally drowns her has long been controversial. Upon its original 1931 release, the second part of this scene was cut by state censorship boards in Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and New York.[5] Those states also objected to a line they considered blasphemous, one that occurred during Frankenstein's exuberance when he first learns that his creature is alive. The original line was: "It's alive! It's alive! In the name of God! Now I know what it feels like to be God!"[5] Kansas requested the cutting of 32 scenes, which, if removed, would have halved the length of the film.[7] Jason Joy of the Studio Relations Committee sent censor representative Joseph Breen to urge them to reconsider. Eventually, an edited version was released in Kansas.[5]As with many Pre-Code films that were reissued after strict enforcement of the Production Code in 1934, Universal made cuts from the master negative.[8]These censored scenes were not shown for decades; in 1986, MCA-Universal restored the shots of Fritz tormenting the Monster, the close up of the needle injection and Maria being thrown in the water, while the full "Now I know what it feels like to be God!" line would not be fully restored until 1999.[citation needed]Mordaunt Hall gave Frankenstein a very positive review and said that the film "aroused so much excitement at the Mayfair yesterday that many in the audience laughed to cover their true feelings." "[T]here is no denying that it is far and away the most effective thing of its kind. Beside it "Dracula" is tame and, incidentally, "Dracula" was produced by the same firm [...]"[9]Frankenstein has received acclaim from critics and is widely regarded as one of the best films of 1931,[10][11][12][13] as well as one of the greatest movies of all time.[14][15] It holds a 100% "Fresh" rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes.[16] In 1991, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant".[17][18] In 2004, The New York Times placed the film on its Best 1000 Movies Ever list.[19]Frankenstein also received recognition from the American Film Institute. It was named the 87th greatest movie of all time on 100 Years... 100 Movies.[14] The line "It's alive! It's alive!" was ranked as the 49th greatest movie quote in American cinema.[20] The film was on the ballot for several of AFI's 100 series lists, including AFI's 10 Top 10 for the sci-fi category,[21] 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition),[22] and twice on 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains for both Dr. Henry Frankenstein and the Monster in the villains category.[23]The film was ranked number 56 on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Thrills, a list of America's most heart-pounding movies.[24] It was also ranked number 27 on Bravo's 100 Scariest Movie Moments.[25] Additionally, the Chicago Film Critics Association named it the 14th scariest film ever made.[26]Frankenstein was followed by a string of sequels, beginning with Bride of Frankenstein (1935), in which Elsa Lanchester plays the Monster's bride.The next sequel, 1939's Son of Frankenstein, was made, like all those that followed, without Whale or Clive (who had died in 1937). This film also featured Karloff's last full film performance as the Monster. Son of Frankenstein featured Basil Rathbone as Baron Wolf von Frankenstein, and Lionel Atwill as Inspector Krogh.The Ghost of Frankenstein was released in 1942. The movie features Lon Chaney, Jr. as the Monster, taking over from Boris Karloff, who played the role in the first three films of the series, and Bela Lugosi in his second appearance as the demented Ygor.The fifth installment, Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man was released in 1943, directed by Roy William Neill, and starring Bela Lugosi as Frankenstein's monster. This is also the sequel to The Wolf Man, with Lon Chaney, Jr. as the Wolf Man. Karloff returned to the series, but not the role, in the 1944 followup, House of Frankenstein, which also featured Chaney, and adds Dracula and a Hunchback for good measure. 1945's House of Dracula continued the theme of combining Universal's three most popular monsters.Many of the subsequent films which featured Frankenstein's monster demote the creature to a robotic henchman in someone else's plots, such as in its final Universal film appearance in the deliberately farcical Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein (1948).Karloff would return to the wearing of the makeup and to the role of the Monster one last time in an episode of the TV show Route 66 in the early 1960s.The popular 1960s TV show, The Munsters, depicts the family's father Herman as Frankenstein's monster, who married Count Dracula's daughter. The make-up for Herman is based on the make-up of Boris Karloff.Mel Brooks's comedy Young Frankenstein parodied elements of the first three Universal Frankenstein movies. Brooks also recreated the movie into a musical of the same name.Universal film company's 2004 film Van Helsing also featured the Frankenstein creature.A short film, Frankenthumb, is a comedy spoof created using only thumbs.An animated parody film, Frankenweenie, depicting Victor Frankenstein as a modern American boy and his deceased pet dog as the monster, was made by Tim Burton in 1984. Burton remade it as a full-length animated film in 2012.Several characters in the film The Nightmare Before Christmas are modeled after the characters from Frankenstein, namely Dr. Finklestein and Sally.Although Frankenstein's hunchbacked assistant is often referred to as "Igor" in descriptions of the films, this is incorrect. In both Frankenstein and Bride of Frankenstein, Frankenstein has an assistant who is played both times by Dwight Frye who is crippled. In the original 1931 film the character is named "Fritz" who is hunchbacked and walks with the aid of a small cane. In Bride of Frankenstein, Frye plays "Karl" a murderer who stands upright but has a lumbering metal brace on both legs that can be heard clicking loudly with every step. Both characters would be killed by Karloff's monster in their respective films. It was not until Son of Frankenstein that a character called "Ygor" first appears (here played by Bela Lugosi and revived by Lugosi in the Ghost of Frankenstein after his apparent murder in Son of Frankenstein). This character  a deranged blacksmith whose neck and back are broken and twisted due to a botched hanging  befriends the monster and later helps Dr. Wolf Frankenstein, leading to the "hunchbacked assistant" called "Igor" commonly associated with Frankenstein in pop culture.November 21, 1931(1931-11-21)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Censorship history5 Reception6 Sequels and parodies

6.1 Frankenstein's assistant

6.1 Frankenstein's assistant7 See also8 Notes9 Sources10 External links6.1 Frankenstein's assistantColin Clive as Henry FrankensteinMae Clarke as ElizabethJohn Boles as Victor MoritzBoris Karloff (billed as "?") as Frankenstein's monsterEdward Van Sloan as Dr. WaldmanFrederick Kerr as Baron FrankensteinDwight Frye as FritzLionel Belmore as Herr Vogel, the BurgomasterMarilyn Harris as Little MariaFrankenstein's line, "Now I know what it feels like to be God!", was cut.[citation needed]Some footage of Frankenstein's assistant Fritz taking sadistic glee in scaring the monster by waving a lit torch near him while the monster is shackled in chains.[citation needed]Close up of needle injection was removed.[citation needed]In the scene of the monster and the little girl tossing flowers into the lake, the second part of the scene was cut, beginning at the moment he extends his hands to pick her up.[citation needed]Universal MonstersUniversal HorrorThe Spirit of the BeehiveBoris Karloff filmographyPre-Code HollywoodDoherty, Thomas Patrick. Pre-Code Hollywood: Sex, Immorality, and Insurrection in American Cinema 1930-1934. New York: Columbia University Press 1999. ISBN 0-231-11094-4Vieira, Mark A., Sin in Soft Focus. New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. 2003. ISBN 0-8109-8228-5Frankenstein (1931) at DBCult Film InstituteFrankenstein (1931 film) at the Internet Movie DatabaseFrankenstein (1931 film) at Rotten TomatoesFrankenstein (1931 film) at the TCM Movie DatabaseFrankenstein (1931 film) at AllRoviMore Than the Sum of Its Parts: The Making of Frankenstein by Stephen Jacobs at Creativescreenwriting.com12 Angry Men is a 1957 American drama film adapted from a teleplay of the same name by Reginald Rose.[3][4] Directed by Sidney Lumet, the film tells the story of a jury made up of 12 men as they deliberate the guilt or acquittal of a defendant on the basis of reasonable doubt. In the United States (both then and now), a verdict in most criminal trials by jury must be unanimous. The film is notable for its almost exclusive use of one set: with the exception of the film's opening, which begins outside on the steps of the courthouse followed by the jury's final instructions before retiring, a brief final scene on the courthouse steps, and two short scenes in an adjoining washroom, the entire movie takes place in the jury room. The total time spent outside of the jury room is three minutes out of the full 96minutes of the movie.12 Angry Men explores many techniques of consensus-building, and the difficulties encountered in the process, among a group of men whose range of personalities adds intensity and conflict. Apart from two of the jurors swapping names while leaving the courthouse, no names are used in the film: the defendant is referred to as "the boy" and the witnesses as the "old man" and "the lady across the street".In 2007, 12 Angry Men was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".[5]The story begins in a courtroom where an 18-year-old Mexican boy from a New York city slum, is on trial for allegedly stabbing his father to death. Final closing arguments are presented, and the judge then instructs the jury to decide whether the boy is guilty of murder. The judge further informs them that a guilty verdict will be accompanied by a mandatory death sentence.[6]The twelve-man jury retires to a private room, where they spend a short while getting acquainted before they begin deliberating. It is immediately apparent that the jurors have already decided that the boy is guilty, and that they plan to return their verdict quickly, without taking time for discussion  with the sole exception of Juror 8 (Henry Fonda). He is the only "not guilty" vote in a preliminary tally. He explains that there is too much at stake for him to go along with the verdict without at least talking about it first. His vote annoys the other jurors, especially Juror 7 (Jack Warden), who has tickets to a baseball game that evening; and Juror 10 (Ed Begley), who believes that everyone from slum backgrounds is evil.The rest of the film's focus is the jury's difficulty in reaching a unanimous verdict. While several of the jurors harbor personal prejudices, Juror 8 maintains that the evidence presented in the case is circumstantial, and that the boy deserves a fair deliberation. He calls into question the accuracy and reliability of the only two witnesses to the murder, the "rarity" of the murder weapon (a common switchblade, of which he has an identical copy), and the overall questionable circumstances (including the fact that an elevated train was passing by at the time of the murder). He further argues that he cannot in good conscience vote "guilty" when he feels there is reasonable doubt of the boy's guilt.Having argued several points and gotten no favorable response from the others, Juror 8 reluctantly agrees that all he seems to be accomplishing is hanging the jury. He takes a bold gamble: he requests another vote, this time by secret ballot. He proposes that he will abstain from voting, and if the other eleven jurors are still unanimous in a guilty vote, then he will acquiesce to their decision. The secret ballot is held, and a new "not guilty" vote appears. This earns intense criticism from Juror 3 (Lee J. Cobb), who blatantly accuses Juror 5 (Jack Klugman)  who had grown up in a slum  of switching only because he's sympathetic toward slum children. However, Juror 9 (Joseph Sweeney) reveals that he himself changed his vote, feeling that Juror 8's points deserve further discussion.Juror 8 presents a convincing argument that one of the witnesses, an elderly man, who claimed to have heard the boy yell "I'm going to kill you" shortly before the murder took place, could not have heard the voices as clearly as he had testified, as well as stating that "I'm going to kill you," is often said by people who do not mean it literally. Juror 5 changes his vote to "not guilty." Soon afterward, Juror 11 (George Voskovec) questions whether the defendant would have reasonably fled the scene and come back three hours later to retrieve the knife, which had been left in his father's chest, then also changes his vote.Juror 7 then mentions the man's second claim: upon hearing the murder, he had gone to the door of his apartment and seen the defendant running out of the building from his front door in 15 seconds. Jurors 5, 6, and 8 question whether this is true, as the witness in question had had a stroke, limiting his ability to walk. Upon the end of an experiment, the jury finds that the witness wouldn't have made it to the door in enough time to actually see the killer running out. Juror 8 concludes that, judging from what he heard earlier, the witness must have merely assumed it was the defendant running. Juror 3, growing more irritated throughout the process, explodes in a rant: "He's got to burn! He's slipping through our fingers!" Juror 8 takes him to task, calling him a "self-appointed public avenger" and a sadist, saying he wants the defendant to die purely for personal reasons, not the facts. Juror 3 shouts "I'll kill him!" and starts lunging at 8, but is restrained by two others. 8 calmly retorts, "You don't really mean you'll kill me, do you?", proving the point he mentioned earlier.[5]Jurors 2 (John Fiedler) and 6 (Edward Binns) also decide to vote "not guilty", tying the vote at 66. Soon after, a rainstorm hits the city, cancelling the baseball game Juror 7 had tickets to.When Juror 4 (E.G. Marshall) states that he doesn't believe the boy's alibi, which was being at the movies with a few friends at the time of the murder because he couldn't remember what movies he saw three hours later, Juror 8 tests how well 4 can remember the events of previous days. When 4 only remembers the events of the previous five days, 8 explains that being under emotional stress can make you forget certain things, and since 4 hadn't been under emotional stress, there was no reason to think the boy could remember the movie he saw.[7]Juror 2 calls into question the prosecution's claim that the accused, who was nearly a foot shorter than the victim, was able to stab him in such a way as to inflict the downward stab wound found on the body. Jurors 3 and 8 conduct an experiment to see if it's possible for a shorter person to stab downward into a taller person. The experiment proves the possibility, but Juror 5 then explains that he had grown up amidst knife fights in his neighborhood, and shows, through demonstrating the correct use of a switchblade, that no one so much shorter than his opponent would have held a switchblade in such a way as to stab downward, as it would have been too awkward and time-consuming. Rather, someone that much shorter than his opponent would stab underhanded at an upwards angle. This revelation augments the certainty of several of the jurors in their belief that the defendant is not guilty.Increasingly impatient, Juror 7 changes his vote just so that the deliberation may end, which earns him the ire of Jurors 3 and 11, both on opposite sides of the discussion. Juror 11, an immigrant who has repeatedly displayed strong patriotic pride, presses Juror 7 hard about using his vote frivolously, and eventually Juror 7 admits that he truly believes the defendant is not guilty.[citation needed]The next jurors to change their votes are Jurors 12 (Robert Webber) and 1 (Martin Balsam), making the vote 93 and leaving only three dissenters: Jurors 3, 4, and 10. Outraged at how the proceedings have gone, Juror 10 proceeds to go into a rage on why people from the slums cannot be trusted, of how they are little better than animals who gleefully kill each other off for fun. His speech offends Juror 5, who turns his back to him, and one by one the rest of the jurors start turning away from him. Confused and disturbed by this reaction to his diatribe, Juror 10 continues in a steadily fading voice and manner, concluding with the entreaty, "Listen to me. Listen..." Juror 4, the only man still facing him, tersely responds, "I have. Now sit down and don't open your mouth again." Juror 8 speaks quietly about the evils of prejudice, and as he does, the other jurors slowly resume their seats.When those remaining in favor of a guilty vote are pressed as to why they still maintain that there is no reasonable doubt, Juror 4 states his belief that despite all the other evidence that has been called into question, the fact remains that the woman who saw the murder from her bedroom window across the street (through the passing train) still stands as solid evidence. After he points this out, Juror 12 changes his vote back to "guilty", making the vote 84 again.Then Juror 9, after seeing Juror 4 rub his nose (which is being irritated by his glasses), realizes that, like Juror 4, the woman who allegedly saw the murder had impressions in the sides of her nose, indicating that she wore glasses, but out of vanity did not wear them in court; Juror 8 cannily asks Juror 4 if he wears his eyeglasses to sleep, and 4 admits he doesn't  no one does.[8] Juror 8 explains that there was thus no reason to expect that the witness happened to be wearing her glasses while trying to sleep, and he points out that the attack happened so swiftly that she would not have had time to put them on. After he points this out, Jurors 12, 10, and 4 all change their vote to "not guilty".At this point, the only remaining juror with a guilty vote is Juror 3. A long argument from 3 reveals that he had had a poor relationship with his son, and his anger over this fact is the main reason he wants the defendant to be guilty. Juror 3 loses his temper and tears up a photo of himself and his son, then suddenly breaks down crying and changes his vote to "not guilty", making the vote unanimous.As the jurors leave the room, 8 helps the distraught 3 with his coat in a show of compassion. The film ends when the friendly Jurors 8 (Davis) and 9 (McCardle) exchange names, and all of the jurors descend the courthouse steps to return to their individual lives.[9]Reginald Rose's screenplay for 12 Angry Men was initially produced for television (starring Robert Cummings as Juror 8), and was broadcast live on the CBS program Studio One in September 1954. A complete kinescope of that performance, which had been missing for years and was feared lost, was discovered in 2003. It was staged at Chelsea Studios in New York City.[10]The success of the television production resulted in a film adaptation. Sidney Lumet, whose prior directorial credits included dramas for television productions such as the Alcoa Hour and Studio One, was recruited by Henry Fonda and Rose to direct. 12 Angry Men was Lumet's first feature film, and for Fonda and Rose, who co-produced the film, it was their first and only role as film producers. Fonda later stated that he would never again produce a film.The filming was completed after a short but rigorous rehearsal schedule in less than three weeks on a tight budget of $340,000, or approximately $2.6 million when adjusted for inflation.At the beginning of the film, the cameras are positioned above eye level and mounted with wide-angle lenses to give the appearance of greater depth between subjects, but as the film progresses the focal length of the lenses is gradually increased. By the end of the film, nearly everyone is shown in closeup using telephoto lenses from a lower angle, which decreases or "shortens" depth of field. Lumet, who began his career as a director of photography, stated that his intention in using these techniques with cinematographer Boris Kaufman was to create a nearly palpable claustrophobia.[11]On its first release, 12 Angry Men received critical acclaim. A. H. Weiler of The New York Times wrote "It makes for taut, absorbing, and compelling drama that reaches far beyond the close confines of its jury room setting." His observation of the twelve men was that "their dramas are powerful and provocative enough to keep a viewer spellbound."[12] However, the film was a financial disaster.[13][14] The advent of colour and widescreen productions resulted in a disappointing box office performance.[13] It wasn't until its first airing on television that the movie finally found its audience.[15]The film is today viewed as a classic, highly regarded from both a critical and popular viewpoint: Roger Ebert lists it as one of his "Great Movies".[16] The American Film Institute named Juror 8, played by Henry Fonda, 28th in a list of the 50 greatest movie heroes of the 20th century. AFI also named 12 Angry Men the 42nd most inspiring film, the 88th most heart-pounding film and the 87th best film of the past hundred years. The film was also nominated for the 100 movies list in 1998.[17] In June 2008, it revealed AFI's 10 Top 10the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genresafter polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. 12 Angry Men was acknowledged as the second best film in the courtroom drama genre. As of January 2011, the film holds a 100% approval rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes.[18] In 2011, the film was the second most screened film in secondary schools in the United Kingdom.[19]The film was nominated for Academy Awards in the categories of Best Director, Best Picture, and Best Writing of Adapted Screenplay. It lost to the movie The Bridge on the River Kwai in all three categories. At the 7th Berlin International Film Festival, the film won the Golden Bear Award.[20]Speaking at a screening of the film during the 2010 Fordham University Law School Film festival, Supreme Court Justice Sonia Sotomayor stated that seeing 12 Angry Men while she was in college influenced her decision to pursue a career in law. She was particularly inspired by immigrant Juror 11's monologue on his reverence for the American justice system. She also told the audience of law students that, as a lower-court judge, she would sometimes instruct juries to not follow the film's example, because most of the jurors' conclusions are based on speculation, not fact.[21] Sotomayor noted that events such as Juror 8 entering a similar knife into the proceeding, doing outside research into the case matter in the first place, and ultimately the jury as a whole making broad, wide ranging assumptions far beyond the scope of reasonable doubt (such as the inferences regarding the "Old Woman" wearing glasses) would never be allowed to occur in a real life jury situation, and would in fact have yielded a mistrial.[22]April 13, 1957(1957-04-13)1 Plot2 Cast of characters3 Production4 Reception

4.1 Critical response
4.2 Legacy
4.3 Awards

4.1 Critical response4.2 Legacy4.3 Awards5 Cultural influences6 See also7 References8 Further reading9 External links4.1 Critical response4.2 Legacy4.3 AwardsAFI's 100 Years100 Movies  NominatedAFI's 100 Years100 Thrills  No. 88AFI's 100 Years100 Heroes and Villains:

Juror No. 8  No. 28 Hero

Juror No. 8  No. 28 HeroAFI's 100 Years100 Cheers  No. 42AFI's 100 Years100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  No. 87AFI's 10 Top 10  No. 2 Courtroom DramaJuror No. 8  No. 28 HeroList of American films of 1957Trial moviesThe WaspsMaking Movies, by Sidney Lumet. (c) 1995, ISBN 978-0-679-75660-6Ellsworth, Phoebe C. (2003). "One Inspiring Jury [Review of Twelve Angry Men]". Michigan Law Review 101 (6): 13871407. JSTOR3595316. In depth analysis compared with research on actual jury behaviour.The New York Times, April 15, 1957, "12 Angry Men", review by A. H. WeilerReadings on Twelve Angry Men, by Russ Munyan, Greenhaven Press, 2000, ISBN 978-0-7377-0313-9Chandler, David. The Transmission model of communication Communication as Perspective Theory. Sage publications. Ohio University, 2006.Lanham, Richard. Introduction: The Domain of Style analyzing prose. (New York, NY: Continuum, 2003)12 Angry Men at the Internet Movie Database12 Angry Men at AllRovi12 Angry Men at Rotten TomatoesCriterion Collection Essay by Thane RosenbaumWatch filmEasy Rider is a 1969 American road movie written by Peter Fonda, Dennis Hopper, and Terry Southern, produced by Fonda and directed by Hopper. It tells the story of two bikers (played by Fonda and Hopper) who travel through the American Southwest and South. The success of Easy Rider helped spark the New Hollywood phase of filmmaking during the early 1970s. The film was added to the Library of Congress National Registry in 1998.A landmark counterculture film,[2] and a "touchstone for a generation" that "captured the national imagination,"[3] Easy Rider explores the societal landscape, issues, and tensions in the United States during the 1960s, such as the rise and fall of the hippie movement, drug use, and communal lifestyle. Easy Rider is famous for its use of real drugs in its portrayal of marijuana and other substances.[4]The protagonists are two freewheeling hippies: Wyatt (Fonda), nicknamed "Captain America", and Billy (Hopper). Fonda and Hopper said that these characters' names refer to Wyatt Earp and Billy the Kid.[4] Wyatt dresses in American flag-adorned leather (with an Office of the Secretary of Defense Identification Badge affixed to it), while Billy dresses in Native American-style buckskin pants and shirts and a bushman hat. The former is appreciative of help and of others, while the latter is often hostile and leery of outsiders.Aftersmuggling cocaine from Mexico to Los Angeles, Wyatt and Billy sell their contraband to "Connection," a man (played by Phil Spector) in a Rolls-Royce and score a large sum of money. With the money from the sale stuffed into a plastic tube hidden inside the Stars & Stripes-adorned fuel tank of Wyatt's California-style chopper, they ride eastward in an attempt to reach New Orleans, Louisiana, in time for Mardi Gras.During their trip, Wyatt and Billy meet and have a meal with a rancher, whom Wyatt admires for his simple, traditional farming lifestyle. Later, the duo pick up a hitch-hiker (Luke Askew) and agree to take him to his commune, where they stay for a day. Life in the commune appears to be hard, with hippies from the city finding it difficult to grow their own crops in a dry climate with poor soil and little rainfall. (One of the children seen in the commune is played by Fonda's four-year-old daughter Bridget.) At one point, the bikers witness a prayer for blessing of the new crop, as put by a communard: A chance "to make a stand", and to plant "simple food, for our simple taste". The commune is also host to a traveling theater group that "sings for its supper" (performs for food). The notion of "free love" appears to be practiced, with two women seemingly sharing the affections of the hitch-hiking communard, and who then turn their attention to Wyatt and Billy. The hitch-hiker wants the two bikers to stay at the commune, saying, "the time is now", to which Wyatt replies "I'm hip about time...but I just gotta go." As the bikers leave, the hitch-hiker (known only as "Stranger on highway" in the credits) gives Wyatt some LSD for him to share with "the right people".While jokingly riding along with a parade in a small town, the pair are arrested by the local authorities for "parading without a permit" and thrown in jail. In jail, they befriend American Civil Liberties Union lawyer and local drunk George Hanson (Jack Nicholson). George helps them get out of jail, and decides to travel with Wyatt and Billy to New Orleans. As they camp that night, Wyatt and Billy introduce George to marijuana. As an alcoholic and a "square", George is reluctant to try the marijuana ("It leads to harder stuff", and "I don't want to get hooked"), but he quickly relents.While attempting to eat in a small rural Louisiana restaurant, the trio's appearance attracts the attention of the locals. The girls in the restaurant want to meet the men and ride with them, but the local men and police officer make mocking, racist, and homophobic remarks. One of the men menacingly states, "I don't believe they'll make the parish line." As the waitress does not take their order Wyatt, Billy, and George leave without eating and make camp outside of town. The events of the day cause George to comment: "This used to be a hell of a good country. I can't understand what's gone wrong with it." He observes that Americans talk a lot about the value of freedom, but are actually afraid of anyone who truly exhibits it.In the middle of the night, the local men find the trio asleep and brutally assault them. Billy manages to scare off the attackers by yelling and brandishing a knife. Wyatt and Billy suffer minor injuries, but George has been killed. Wyatt and Billy wrap George's body up in his sleeping bag, gather his belongings, and vow to return the items to his parents.They continue to New Orleans and find the brothel George had intended to visit. Taking prostitutes Karen (Karen Black) and Mary (Toni Basil) with them, Wyatt and Billy decide to go outside and wander the parade-filled street of the Mardi Gras celebration. They end up in a cemetery, where all four ingest LSD. They experience a psychedelic bad trip infused with Catholic prayer represented through quick edits, sound effects, and over-exposed film.Making camp afterward, Wyatt declares: "We blew it." Wyatt realizes that their search for freedom, while financially successful,[clarification needed] was a spiritual failure. The next morning, the two are continuing their trip to Florida (where they hope to retire wealthy) when two rednecks in a pickup truck spot them and decide to "scare the hell out of them" with their shotgun. As they pull alongside Billy, one of the men lazily aims the shotgun at him and threatens and insults him by saying, "Want me to blow your brains out?" and "Why don't you get a haircut?" When Billy flips his middle finger up at them, the hillbilly fires the shotgun at Billy, who immediately hits the pavement, seriously wounded in the side. As the truck then takes off past Wyatt down the road, Wyatt turns around and races back to put his jacket over his fatally injured friend, who is already covered in blood, before riding off for help. But by this time, the same pickup truck has turned around and closes on Wyatt. Not wanting any witnesses to report them to the police, the hillbilly fires at Wyatt as he speeds by the pickup, hitting the bike's gas tank and causing it to instantly erupt into a fiery explosion. Wyatt lands by the side of the road, dead. As the murderous rednecks drive away, the film ends with a shot of the flaming bike in the middle of the deserted road, as the camera ascends to the sky.When seeing a still of himself and Bruce Dern in The Wild Angels, Peter Fonda had the idea of a modern Western, involving two bikers travelling around the country and eventually getting shot by hillbillies. He called Dennis Hopper, and the two decided to turn that into a movie, The Loners, with Hopper directing, Fonda producing, and both starring and writing. They brought in screenwriter Terry Southern, who came up with the title Easy Rider. The film was mostly shot without a screenplay, with ad-libbed lines, and production started with only the outline and the names of the protagonists. Keeping the Western theme, Wyatt was named after Wyatt Earp and Billy after Billy the Kid.[5]During test shooting on location in New Orleans, Hopper fought with the production's ad hoc crew for control. At one point he entered into a physical confrontation with photographer Barry Feinstein, who was one of the camera operators for the shoot. After this turmoil, Hopper and Fonda decided to assemble a proper crew for the rest of the film.[4]Allegedly, the characters of Wyatt and Billy were respectively based on Roger McGuinn and David Crosby of The Byrds.[6] According to Terry Southern's biographer, Lee Hill, the part of George Hanson had been written for Southern's friend, actor Rip Torn. When Torn met with Hopper and Fonda at a New York restaurant in early 1968 to discuss the role, Hopper began ranting about the "rednecks" he had encountered on his scouting trip to the South. Torn, a Texan, took exception to some of Hopper's remarks, and the two almost came to blows, as a result of which Torn withdrew from the project. Torn was replaced by Jack Nicholson, whom Hopper had recently appeared with in Head (along with another Easy Rider co-star, Toni Basil).[7] In 1994, Jay Leno interviewed Hopper about Easy Rider on The Tonight Show, and during the interview, Hopper alleged that Torn had pulled a knife on him during the altercation, prompting Torn to sue Hopper successfully for defamation.[5]The hippie commune was recreated from pictures and shot near Santa Monica, California overlooking Malibu Canyon, since the New Buffalo commune near Taos in Arroyo Hondo, New Mexico did not permit shooting there.[8]A short clip near the beginning of the film shows Wyatt and Billy on Route 66 in Flagstaff, Arizona, passing a large figure of a lumberjack. That lumberjack statue - once situated in front of the Lumberjack Cafe - remains in Flagstaff, but now stands inside the J. Lawrence Walkup Skydome on the campus of Northern Arizona University.[9] A second, very similar statue was also moved from the Lumberjack Cafe to the exterior of the Skydome.[10]Most of the film is shot outside with natural lighting. Hopper said all the outdoor shooting was an intentional choice on his part, because "God is a great gaffer." The production used two five-ton trucks, one for the equipment and one for the motorcycles, with the cast and crew in a motor home.[8] One of the locations was Monument Valley.[8]The restaurant scenes with Fonda, Hopper, and Nicholson were shot in Morgan City, Louisiana.[8] The men and girls in that scene were all Morgan locals.[8] In order to inspire more vitriolic commentary from the local men, Hopper told them the characters of Billy, Wyatt, and George had raped and killed a girl outside of town.[4] The scene in which Billy and Wyatt were shot was filmed on Louisiana Highway 105 North, just outside of Krotz Springs, Louisiana, and the two other men in the scene - Johnny David and D.C. Billedeau - were Krotz Springs locals.While shooting the cemetery scene, Hopper tried to convince Fonda to talk to the statue of the Madonna as though it were Fonda's mother (who had committed suicide when he was 10 years old) and ask her why she left him. Although Fonda was reluctant, he eventually complied. Later, Fonda used the inclusion of this scene as leverage to persuade Roger McGuinn to allow the use of his cover of Bob Dylan's "It's Alright, Ma (I'm Only Bleeding)".[4]Despite being filmed in the first half of 1968, roughly between Mardi Gras and the assassination of Robert F. Kennedy, with production starting on February 22[11] the film did not have a U.S. premiere until July 1969, after having won an award at the Cannes film festival in May. The delay was partially due to a protracted editing process. Inspired by 2001: A Space Odyssey', one of Hopper's proposed cuts was 220 minutes long, including extensive use of the "flash-forward" narrative device, wherein scenes from later in the movie are inserted into the current scene. But only one flash-forward survives in the final edit: when Wyatt in the New Orleans brothel has a premonition of the final scene. At the request of Bob Rafelson and Bert Schneider, Henry Jaglom was brought in to edit the film into its current form, while Schneider purchased Hopper a trip to Taos so he would not interfere with the recut. Upon seeing the final cut, Hopper was originally displeased, saying that his movie was "turned into a TV show", but he eventually accepted, claiming that Jaglom had crafted the film the way Hopper had originally intended. Despite the large part he played in shaping the film, Jaglom only received credit as an "Editorial Consultant".[5]The motorcycles for the film, based on hardtail frames and panhead engines, were designed and built by two African-American[13] chopper builders - Cliff Vaughs and Ben Hardy - following ideas of Peter Fonda, and handled by Tex Hall and Dan Haggerty during shooting.[14]In total, four former police bikes were used in the film. The 1949, 1950 and 1952 Harley Davidson Hydra-Glide bikes were purchased at an auction for $500, equivalent to about $3300 in current money. Each bike had a backup to make sure that shooting could continue in case one of the old machines failed or got wrecked accidentally. One "Captain America" was demolished in the final scene, while the other three were stolen and probably taken apart before their significance as movie props became known. The demolished bike was rebuilt by Dan Haggerty and shown in a museum. He sold it at an auction in 2001. It now resides at the National Motorcycle Museum in Anamosa, Iowa. Many replicas have been built since the films release.[14]Hopper and Fonda hosted a wrap party for the movie and then realized they had not shot the final campfire scene. Thus, it was shot after the bikes had already been stolen, which is why they are not visible in the background as in the other campfire scenes.[5][14]A box office smash with a $41 million intake (becoming the third highest grossing film of 1969), along with Bonnie and Clyde and The Graduate, Easy Rider helped kick-start the New Hollywood phase during the late 1960s and early 1970s.[15] The major studios realized that money could be made from low-budget films made by avant-garde directors. Heavily influenced by the French New Wave, the films of the so-called "post-classical Hollywood" came to represent a counterculture generation increasingly disillusioned with its government as well as the government's effects on the world at large, the Establishment.[15] Although Jack Nicholson appears only as a supporting actor and in the last half of the film, the standout performance signaled his arrival as a movie star,[15] along with his subsequent film Five Easy Pieces in which he had the lead role.The film's success, and the new era of Hollywood that it helped usher in, gave Hopper the chance to direct again with complete artistic control. The result was 1971's The Last Movie, which was a notable box office and critical failure, effectively ending Hopper's career as a director for well over a decade.Hopper received the First Film Award (Prix de la premire uvre) at the 1969 Cannes Film Festival.[16] At the Academy Awards, Jack Nicholson was nominated for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, and the film was also nominated for Best Writing, Story and Screenplay Based on Material Not Previously Published or Produced.The film appears at number 88 on the American Film Institute's list of 100 Years, 100 Movies. In 1998, Easy Rider was added to the United States National Film Registry, having been deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."The movie's "groundbreaking"[17] soundtrack featured The Band, The Jimi Hendrix Experience, and Steppenwolf.[17] Editor Donn Cambern used various music from his own record collection to make watching hours of bike footage more interesting during editing.[8] Most of Cambern's music was used, with licensing costs of $1 million, more than the film's budget.[8] When CSN viewed a rough cut of the film, they assured Hopper that they could not do any better than he already had.Bob Dylan was asked to contribute music, but was reluctant to use his own recording of "It's Alright, Ma (I'm Only Bleeding)", so a version performed by Byrds frontman Roger McGuinn was used, instead. Also, instead of writing an entirely new song for the film, Dylan simply wrote out the first verse of Ballad of Easy Rider and told the filmmakers, Give this to McGuinn, hell know what to do with it. McGuinn completed the song and performed it in the film.The film was released by The Criterion Collection in November 2010 as part of the box set, America Lost and Found: The BBS Story. It included two audio commentaries, one featuring actor-director-writer Dennis Hopper, the other Hopper, actor-writer Peter Fonda, and production manager Paul Lewis, Born to Be Wild (1995) and Easy Rider: Shaking the Cage (1999), documentaries about the making and history of the film, television excerpts showing Hopper and Fonda at the Cannes Film Festival, and a new video interview with BBS cofounder Steve Blauner.[18]July 14, 1969(1969-07-14)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Motorcycles5 Significance6 Awards and honors7 Music8 Home media9 See also10 Notes11 References12 External linksPeter Fonda  Wyatt, "Captain America"Dennis Hopper  BillyJack Nicholson  George HansonLuke Askew  Stranger on HighwayPhil Spector  ConnectionKaren Black  KarenToni Basil  MaryAntonio Mendoza  JesusMac Mashourian  BodyguardWarren Finnerty  RancherTita Colorado  Rancher's WifeLuana Anders  LisaSabrina Scharf  SarahRobert Walker Jr.  JackSandy Brown Wyeth  JoanneBridget Fonda and Justin Fonda (uncredited)  children in the commune sceneCarrie Snodgress (uncredited)  Woman in CommuneDan Haggerty (uncredited)  Man in CommuneAmerican DreamHippie exploitation filmsMethod actingOutlaw biker filmAldaz, Gabriel (2010). Right Palm Up, Left Palm Down: The Log of a Cross-Country Scavenger Hunt. SparkWorks. ISBN978-0-9703407-7-1.Carr, Jay; National Society of Film Critics (2002). The A List: The National Society of Film Critics' 100 Essential Films. Da Capo Press. ISBN0-306-81096-4.Easy Rider Bibliography (via UC Berkeley)Hill, Lee (1996). Easy Rider. British Film Institute. ISBN0-85170-543-X.Hoberman, J.. Criterion Collection EssayKlinger, Barbara (1997). "The Road to Dystopia: Landscaping the Nation in Easy Rider". In Steven Cohan, Ina Rae Hark. The Road Movie Book. New York: Routledge. ISBN0-415-14936-3.Lev, Peter (2000). American Films of the 70s: Conflicting Visions. University of Texas Press. ISBN0-292-74716-0. http://www.utexas.edu/utpress/books/levame.html.Osgerby, Bill (2005). Biker: Truth and Myth: How the Original Cowboy of the Road Became the Easy Rider of the Silver Screen. Globe Pequot. ISBN1-59228-841-3.Phipps, Keith. (November 16, 2009) Slate.com. The Easy Rider Road Trip: Retracing the Path of the Iconic Movie on Its 40th AnniversaryZoller Seitz, Matt. Criterion Collection EssayEasy Rider at the Internet Movie DatabasePatton: Ordeal and Triumphby
Ladislas FaragoPatton is a 1970 American biographical war film about U.S. General George S. Patton during World War II. It stars George C. Scott, Karl Malden, Michael Bates, and Karl Michael Vogler. It was directed by Franklin J. Schaffner from a script by Francis Ford Coppola and Edmund H. North, who based their screenplay on the biography Patton: Ordeal and Triumph by Ladislas Farago and Omar Bradley's memoir A Soldier's Story. The film was shot in 65mm Dimension 150 by cinematographer Fred J. Koenekamp, and has a music score by Jerry Goldsmith.Patton won eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture.The opening monologue, delivered by George C. Scott as General Patton with an enormous American flag behind him, remains an iconic and often quoted image in film. The film was a success and has become an American classic.[3]In 2003, Patton was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".The film's famous beginning has General George S. Patton (George C. Scott) giving a speech to an unseen audience of American troops (based on his speech to the Third Army), with a huge American flag in the background. The scene then shifts to North Africa at the start of 1943, where Patton takes charge of the demoralized American II Corps in North Africa after the humiliating defeat at the Battle of the Kasserine Pass. After instilling discipline in his soldiers, he leads them to victory at the Battle of El Guettar, though he is bitterly disappointed to learn afterward that Erwin Rommel (Karl Michael Vogler), whom he respects greatly as a general, was not his opponent. Patton's aide, Captain Jensen, is killed in the battle and replaced by Lieutenant Colonel Codman who assures Patton that, though Rommel was absent, that if Patton defeated Rommel's plan, then he defeated Rommel.Patton is shown to believe in reincarnation, while remaining a devout Christian. At one point during the North Africa campaign, he takes his staff on an unexpected detour to the site of the ancient Battle of Zama. There he reminisces about the battle, insisting to his second in command, General Omar Bradley (Karl Malden) that he was there.After North Africa is secured, Patton is involved in the Allied invasion of Sicily. His proposal to land his Seventh Army in the northwest of the island is rejected in favor of the more cautious plan of British General Bernard Law Montgomery, in which the British and American armies are to land side-by-side in the southeast. Frustrated at the slow progress of the campaign, Patton defies orders, racing northwest to capture the city of Palermo and then narrowly beats Montgomery in a race to capture the port of Messina in the northeast. However, Patton's aggression is regarded with increasing disquiet by his subordinates Bradley and Truscott, and he is eventually relieved of command for slapping and threatening to shoot a shell-shocked soldier, whom he accuses of cowardice, in an Army hospital.For this incident and for his tendency to speak his mind to the press, he is sidelined during the long-anticipated D-Day landings, being placed in command of the fictional First United States Army Group in southeast England as a decoy. German General Alfred Jodl (Richard Mnch) is convinced that Patton will lead the invasion of Europe.Fearing he will miss out on his destiny, he begs his former subordinate, General Omar Bradley, for a command before the war ends. He is given the Third Army and distinguishes himself by rapidly sweeping across France until his tanks are halted by lack of fuel. He later relieves the vital town of Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge. He then smashes through the Siegfried Line and drives into Germany itself.Patton has previously remarked to a British crowd that the United States and Great Britain would dominate the post-war world, which is viewed as a slight to the Russians. After the Germans capitulate, he insults a Russian officer at a celebration; fortunately, the Russian insults Patton right back, defusing the situation. Patton then makes an offhand remark comparing the Nazi Party to the political parties in the U.S. In the end, Patton's outspokenness loses him his command once again, though he is kept on to see to the rebuilding of Germany.The film ends with Patton walking his dog, a bull terrier named Willie, and Scott relating in a voice over that a returning hero of ancient Rome was honored with a victory parade in which "a slave stood behind the conqueror holding a golden crown and whispering in his ear a warning: that all glory is fleeting."Attempts to make a film about the life of Patton had been ongoing for over fifteen years, commencing in 1953. Eventually, the Patton family was approached by the producers for help in making the film. The filmmakers desired access to Patton's diaries, as well as input from family members. However, by unfortunate coincidence, the producers contacted the family the day after Beatrice Ayer Patton, the general's widow, was laid to rest. After this encounter, the family refused to provide any assistance to the film's producers.In the end, screenwriters Francis Ford Coppola and Edmund H. North wrote the script based largely on the biographies Patton: Ordeal and Triumph by Ladislas Farago and A Soldier's Story by Omar Bradley.Omar Bradley served as a consultant for the film, though the extent of his influence and input into the final script is largely unknown. While Bradley knew Patton personally, it was also well known that the two men were polar opposites in personality, and there is evidence to conclude that Bradley despised Patton both personally and professionally.[5][6] As the film was made without access to General Patton's diaries, it largely relied upon observations by Bradley and other military contemporaries when attempting to reconstruct Patton's thoughts and motives.[7] In a review of the film, S.L.A. Marshall, who knew both Patton and Bradley, stated that "The Bradley name gets heavy billing on a picture of [a] comrade that, while not caricature, is the likeness of a victorious, glory-seeking buffoon. ... Patton in the flesh was an enigma. He so stays in the film. ... Napoleon once said that the art of the general is not strategy but knowing how to mold human nature. ... Maybe that is all producer Frank McCarthy and Gen. Bradley, his chief advisor, are trying to say."[7]Patton opens with Scott's rendering of Patton's famous military "Pep Talk" to members of the Third Army, set against a huge American flag. Coppola and North had to tone down Patton's actual words and statements in this scene, as well as throughout the film, to avoid an R rating; in the opening monologue, the word "fornicating" replaced "fucking" when criticizing The Saturday Evening Post. Also, Scott's gravelly and scratchy voice is the complete opposite of Patton's high-pitched, nasal and somewhat squeaky voice, a point noted by historian S.L.A. Marshall.[7] Yet Marshall also points out that the film contains "too much cursing and obscenity [by Patton]. Patton was not habitually foul-mouthed. He used dirty words when he thought they were needed to impress."[7]When Scott learned that the speech would open the film, he refused to do it, as he believed that it would overshadow the rest of his performance. Director Franklin J. Schaffner assured him that it would be shown at the end. The scene was actually shot on the stage of the theater at the Los Alamitos Naval Air Station in Los Alamitos California.All the medals and decorations shown on Patton's uniform in the monologue are authentic replicas of those actually awarded to Patton. However, the general never wore all of them in public. He wore them all on only one occasion, in his backyard in Virginia at the request of his wife, who wanted a picture of him with all his medals. The producers used a copy of this photo to help recreate this "look" for the opening scene. However, the ivory-handled revolvers Scott wears in this scene are in fact Patton's, borrowed from the General George S. Patton Memorial Museum.Most of the film was shot in Spain. One scene, which depicts Patton driving up to an ancient city that is implied to be Carthage, was shot in the ancient Roman city of Volubilis, located in Morocco. The early scene, wherein Patton and Muhammed V are reviewing Moroccan troops including the Goumiers, was shot at the Royal Palace in Rabat. One unannounced battle scene was shot the night before, which raised fears in the Royal Palace neighborhood of a coup d'tat. One paratrooper was electrocuted in power lines, but none of this battle footage appears in the film. Also a scene at the dedication of the welcome center in Knutsford, England was filmed at the actual site. The scenes set in Africa and Sicily were shot in the south of Spain (Almeria ), while the winter scenes in Belgium were shot near Segovia (to which the production crew rushed when they were informed that snow had fallen).[8]It has been noted that in the scene where Patton arrives to establish his North African command, a supposedly "Arab" woman is selling "pollos y gallinas" (chickens and hens) in Spanish, which is not normally spoken by local people in Tunisia (though it is in the north of Morocco, Spanish Protectorate from 1912 to 1956).A sizeable amount of battle scene footage was left out of the final cut of Patton, but a use was soon found for it. Outtakes from Patton were used to provide battle-scenes in the made-for-TV movie Fireball Forward which was first broadcast in 1972. The film was produced by Patton producer Frank McCarthy and Edmund North wrote the screenplay. One of the cast-members of Patton Morgan Paull appeared in this production alongside Eddie Albert, Ben Gazzara and Ricardo Montalban. The plot featured a general taking command of a U.S. infantry division with a high casualty rate, a reputation as a hard-luck outfit and a suspected traitor hiding in its midst.[9]The critically acclaimed score for Patton was composed and conducted by the prolific composer Jerry Goldsmith. Goldsmith used a number of innovative methods to tie the music to the film, such as having an echoplex loop recorded sounds of "call to war" triplets played on the trumpet to musically represent General Patton's belief in reincarnation. The main theme also consisted of a symphonic march accompanied by a pipe organ to represent the militaristic yet deeply religious nature of the protagonist.[10] The music to Patton subsequently earned Goldsmith an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Score and was one of the American Film Institute's 250 nominees for the top twenty-five American film scores.[11] The original soundtrack has been released three times on disc and once on LP; through Twentieth-Century Fox Records in 1970; through Tsunami Records in 1992, through Film Score Monthly in 1999, and a two-disc extended version through Intrada Records in 2010.[10][12]Patton was first telecast by ABC-TV as a three hours-plus color movie special in the fall of 1972, only two years after its theatrical release. This was highly unusual at the time, especially for a roadshow theatrical release which had played in theatres for many months. Most theatrical films at that time had to wait at least five years for their first telecast. Another unusual element of the telecast was that very, very little of Patton's profanity-laced dialogue was cut (only two sentences, one of which contained no profanity, were cut from the famous opening speech in front of the giant U.S. flag).Patton was first released on DVD in 1999 featuring a partial audio commentary by a Patton historian. Then again in 2006 with a commentary by screenwriter Francis Ford Coppola and extra bonus features.The film made its Blu-ray debut in 2008 to much criticism for it's excessive use of digital noise reduction on the picture quality. In 2012, a remaster was released with much improved picture quality.[1]Roger Ebert said of George C. Scott, "It is one of those sublime performances in which the personalities of the actor and the character are fulfilled in one another."[13] Online film critic James Berardinelli has called Patton his favorite film of all time[14] and "...to this day one of Hollywood's most compelling biographical war pictures."[15]According to Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein's book The Final Days, it was also Richard Nixon's favorite film. He screened it several times at the White House and during a cruise on the Presidential yacht. Before the 1972 Nixon visit to China, then Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai specially watched this film in preparation for his meeting with Nixon.Scott's performance won him an Academy Award for Best Actor in 1971. He famously refused to accept it, citing a dislike of the voting and even the actual concept of acting competitions.[16] He was the first actor to do so.The film won six additional Academy Awards, for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, Best Film Editing, Best Sound (Douglas Williams, Don Bassman), and Best Art Direction (Urie McCleary, Gil Parrondo, Antonio Mateos, Pierre-Louis Thvenet).[17] The Best Picture Oscar is on display at the George C. Marshall Museum at the Virginia Military Institute, courtesy of Frank McCarthy.It was nominated for Best Cinematography, Best Visual Effects and Best Music, Original Score.[18]In 2006, the Writers Guild of America selected Francis Ford Coppola and Edmund North's adapted screenplay as the 94th best screenplay of all time.American Film Institute ListsA made-for-television sequel, The Last Days of Patton, was produced in 1986. Scott reprised his title role. The movie was based on Patton's final weeks after being mortally injured in a car accident, with flashbacks of Patton's life.In 2005, Patton's wife's "Button Box" manuscript was finally released by his family, with the posthumous release of Ruth Ellen Patton Totten's book, The Button Box: A Daughter's Loving Memoir of Mrs. George S. Patton.[19]April 2, 1970(1970-04-02)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Script preparation
3.2 The opening
3.3 Locations
3.4 Use of footage
3.5 Music

3.5.1 2010 Intrada Records Album

3.5.1.1 Disc One
3.5.1.2 Disc Two





3.1 Script preparation3.2 The opening3.3 Locations3.4 Use of footage3.5 Music

3.5.1 2010 Intrada Records Album

3.5.1.1 Disc One
3.5.1.2 Disc Two



3.5.1 2010 Intrada Records Album

3.5.1.1 Disc One
3.5.1.2 Disc Two

3.5.1.1 Disc One3.5.1.2 Disc Two4 Distribution

4.1 First telecast
4.2 Home media

4.1 First telecast4.2 Home media5 Reaction

5.1 Critical response
5.2 Accolades

5.1 Critical response5.2 Accolades6 Sequel7 See also8 Notes9 External links3.1 Script preparation3.2 The opening3.3 Locations3.4 Use of footage3.5 Music

3.5.1 2010 Intrada Records Album

3.5.1.1 Disc One
3.5.1.2 Disc Two



3.5.1 2010 Intrada Records Album

3.5.1.1 Disc One
3.5.1.2 Disc Two

3.5.1.1 Disc One3.5.1.2 Disc Two3.5.1 2010 Intrada Records Album

3.5.1.1 Disc One
3.5.1.2 Disc Two

3.5.1.1 Disc One3.5.1.2 Disc Two3.5.1.1 Disc One3.5.1.2 Disc Two4.1 First telecast4.2 Home media5.1 Critical response5.2 AccoladesGeorge C. Scott as General George S. Patton. Rod Steiger had first turned down the role, later admitting that it was the worst decision of his career.[4]Karl Malden as General Omar BradleyStephen Young as Captain Chester B. HansenMichael Strong as Brigadier General Hobart CarverMichael Bates as Field Marshal Bernard MontgomeryFrank Latimore as Lieutenant Colonel Henry DavenportMorgan Paull as Captain Richard N. JensenKarl Michael Vogler as Field Marshal Erwin RommelJohn Barrie as Air Marshal Arthur ConinghamSiegfried Rauch as Captain SteigerRichard Mnch as Colonel General Alfred JodlJohn Doucette as Major General Lucian TruscottPaul Stevens as Colonel Charles R. CodmanJack Gwillim as General Harold AlexanderGerald Flood as Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur TedderEd Binns as General Walter B. SmithPeter Barkworth as Colonel John WelkinLawrence Dobkin as Colonel Gaston BellLionel Murton as Third Army chaplain James H. O'NeillDavid Healy as ClergymanDouglas Wilmer as Major General Francis de GuingandJames Edwards as Sergeant William George MeeksTim Considine as Corporal Charles KuhlClint Ritchie as Tank captainAlan MacNaughtan as British briefing officerAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - #89AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

General George Patton - #29 Hero

General George Patton - #29 HeroAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"Now, I want you to remember that no bastard ever won a war by dying for his country. He won it by making the other poor dumb bastard die for his country." - Nominated

"Now, I want you to remember that no bastard ever won a war by dying for his country. He won it by making the other poor dumb bastard die for his country." - NominatedAFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers - NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - NominatedAFI's 10 Top 10 - Nominated Epic filmGeneral George Patton - #29 Hero"Now, I want you to remember that no bastard ever won a war by dying for his country. He won it by making the other poor dumb bastard die for his country." - NominatedPatton at the Internet Movie DatabasePatton at Rotten TomatoesPatton at MetacriticOpening Speech from the Movie in Text, Audio and Video from AmericanRhetoric.comThe Sixth Sense is a 1999 American psychological horror film written and directed by M. Night Shyamalan. The film tells the story of Cole Sear (Haley Joel Osment), a troubled, isolated boy who is able to see and talk to the dead, and an equally troubled child psychologist (Bruce Willis) who tries to help him. The film established Shyamalan as a writer and director, and introduced the cinema public to his traits, most notably his affinity for surprise endings. The film was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture.Dr. Malcolm Crowe (Bruce Willis), a child psychologist in Philadelphia, returns home one night with his wife, Anna Crowe (Olivia Williams), after having been honored for his work. Anna tells Crowe that everything is second to his work. The two then discover that they are not alone; a young man appears brandishing a gun. He says that he does not want to be afraid anymore and accuses Crowe of failing him. Crowe recognizes him as Vincent Gray (Donnie Wahlberg), a former patient whom he treated as a child for hallucinations. Gray shoots Crowe in the abdomen, and seconds later kills himself with the gun.The next autumn, Crowe begins working with another patient, nine-year-old Cole Sear (Haley Joel Osment), who has a condition similar to Vincent's. Crowe becomes dedicated to the boy, though he is haunted by doubts over his ability to help him after his failure with Vincent. Meanwhile, his relationship with his wife has deteriorated to the point where she ignores him and refuses to talk to him. Crowe believes that she may be contemplating a romance with a coworker who keeps coming around the house although this elicits sadness from him not anger. Crowe also repeatedly has difficulty opening the door to his basement office.Once Crowe earns his trust, Cole eventually confides in him that he "sees dead people... walking around like regular people". One ghost who appears to Cole is an overworked wife, abused by her husband, who has slit her wrists. Another that tries to hurt Cole is only heard as a voice who pleads with Cole to let him out of a dark cupboard, then yells that he didn't steal "the Master's horse" and threatens to attack Cole. A third ghost is a boy with a large gunshot exit wound on the back of his head who asks Cole to come with him to find his father's gun.Though Crowe at first thinks Cole is delusional, he eventually comes to believe that Cole is telling the truth and that Vincent may have had the same ability to perceive ghosts. He suggests to Cole that he should try to find a purpose for his gift by communicating with the ghosts and perhaps aid them with their unfinished business on Earth. Cole at first does not want to since the ghosts terrify him, but he finally decides to try it. He talks to one of the ghosts, a very ill girl who appears in his bedroom and promptly vomits in his tent. He finds where the girl, Kyra Collins (Mischa Barton), lived and goes to her house during her funeral reception. Kyra died after a prolonged illness and funeral guests note that Kyra's younger sister is starting to get sick, too. Kyra's ghost appears and gives Cole a box, which is opened to reveal a videotape. When Cole gives it to Kyra's father, the videotape shows Kyra's stepmother putting floor cleaner fluid in Kyra's food[2] while she cared for Kyra during her illness.Cole confesses his secret to his mother, Lynn (Toni Collette). Although his mother at first does not believe him, Cole soon tells Lynn that her own mother once went to see her perform in a dance recital one night when she was a child, and that Lynn was not aware of this because her mother stayed in the back of the audience where she could not be seen. He also tells her that the answer to a question she asked when alone at her mother's grave, "Do I make you proud?", was "Every day". Lynn tearfully accepts this as the truth.Crowe returns to his home, where he finds his wife asleep on the couch with the couple's wedding video playing, not for the first time. As she sleeps, Anna's hand releases Malcolm's wedding ring (which he suddenly discovers he has not been wearing), revealing to Crowe that he was actually killed by Vincent and was unknowingly dead the entire time he was working with Cole. Due to Cole's efforts, Crowe's unfinished businessrectifying his failure to understand and help Vincentis finally complete. Recalling Cole's advice, Crowe speaks to his sleeping wife and fulfills the second reason he returned, saying she was "never second", and that he loves her. Letting her live her own life, he is free to leave the world of the living and Cole had learned to live with the ghosts as it had become a part of his life.According to the book DisneyWar, Disney's David Vogel read Shyamalan's speculative script and instantly loved it. Without obtaining approval from his boss, Vogel bought the rights to the script, despite the high price of US$2 million and the stipulation that Shyamalan could direct the film. Disney later dismissed Vogel as President of Walt Disney Pictures, and Vogel left the company. Disney, apparently in a show of little confidence in the film, sold the production rights to Spyglass Entertainment, and kept only a 12.5% distribution fee for itself.In the commentary from the film Superbad, Michael Cera said that his first film audition was for the role of Cole Sear.Donnie Wahlberg lost 43 pounds to achieve his character's emaciated form.[citation needed]The color red is intentionally absent from most of the film, but is used prominently in a few isolated shots for "anything in the real world that has been tainted by the other world"[3] and "to connote really explosively emotional moments and situations".[4] Examples include the door of the church where Cole seeks sanctuary; the color of the balloon, carpet, and Cole's sweater at the birthday party; the tent in which he first encounters Kyra; the volume numbers on Crowe's tape recorder; the doorknob on the locked basement door where Malcolm's office is located; The shirt that Anna wears at the restaurant; Kyra's mother's dress at the wake; and the shawl wrapped around the sleeping Anna when Malcolm realizes he is a ghost.All of the clothes Malcolm wears during the film are items he wore or touched the evening before his death, which included his overcoat, his blue rowing sweatshirt and the different layers of his suit. Though the filmmakers were careful about clues of Malcolm's true state, the camera zooms slowly towards his face when Cole says "I see dead people". In a special feature the filmmakers mention they initially feared this would be a dead giveaway, but decided to leave it in.[5]The film received positive reviews from critics, with an 85% 'fresh' rating on Rotten Tomatoes,[6] and 64 rating on Metacritic.[7]The film had a production budget of approximately $40 million (plus $25 million for prints and advertising). It grossed $26.6 million in its opening weekend and spent five weeks as the No. 1 film at the U.S. box office.[1] It earned $293,506,292 in the United States and a worldwide gross of $672,806,292, ranking it 35th on the list of box-office money earners in the U.S. as of April 2010.[8] In the United Kingdom, it was given at first a limited release at 9 screens, and entered at No. 8 before climbing up to No. 1 the next week with 430 theatres playing the film.[9][10]By vote of the members of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America, The Sixth Sense was awarded the Nebula Award for Best Script during 1999. The film was No. 71 on Bravo's 100 Scariest Movie Moments, for the scene where Cole encounters a female ghost in his tent. It was also recently named the 89th Best Film of all time by the American Film Institute during 2007.The line "I see dead people" from the film became a popular catchphrase after its release, scoring No. 44 on AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes. The Sixth Sense also scored 60th place on AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills, honoring America's most "heart pounding movies". It also appears on AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition), a list of America's 100 greatest movies of all time.The Sixth Sense has received numerous awards and nominations, with nomination categories ranging from those honoring the film itself (Best Film), to its writing, editing, and direction (Best Direction, Best Editing, Best Original Screenplay), to its cast's performance (Best Actor / Actress). Especially lauded was the supporting role of actor Haley Joel Osment, whose nominations include an Academy Award,[11] a Broadcast Film Critics Association Award,[12] and a Golden Globe Award.[13] Overall, The Sixth Sense was nominated for six Academy Awards and four British Academy Film Awards, but won none.[11][14] The film received three nominations from the People's Choice Awards and won all of them, with lead actor Bruce Willis being honored for his role.[15] The Satellite Awards nominated the film in four categories, with awards being received for writing (M. Night Shyamalan) and editing (Andrew Mondshein).[16] Supporting actress Toni Collette was nominated for both an Academy Award and a Satellite award for her role in the film.[11][16] James Newton Howard was honored by the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers for his composition of the music for the film.[17]American Film Institute listsAugust 6, 1999(1999-08-06)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception

4.1 Accolades

4.1 Accolades5 References6 External links4.1 AccoladesBruce Willis as Malcolm CroweHaley Joel Osment as Cole SearToni Collette as Lynn SearOlivia Williams as Anna CroweTrevor Morgan as Tommy TammisimoDonnie Wahlberg as Vincent GreyPeter Tambakis as DarrenJeffrey Zubernis as BobbyBruce Norris as Stanley CunninghamGlenn Fitzgerald as SeanGreg Wood as Mr. CollinsMischa Barton as Kyra CollinsAngelica Torn as Mrs. CollinsLisa Summerour as BridesmaidFirdous Bamji as Young Man Buying RingSamia Shoaib as Young Woman Buying RingHayden Saunier as Darren's MomJanis Dardaris as Kitchen WomanNeill Hartley as Visitor No. 2Sarah Ripard as Visitor No. 3Heidi Fischer as Visitor No. 4Kadee Strickland as Visitor No. 5Michael J. Lyons as Visitor No. 6Samantha Fitzpatrick as Kyra's SisterHolly Rudkin as Society Lady No. 1Kate Kearney-Patch as Society Lady No. 2Marilyn Shanok as Woman at AccidentM. Night Shyamalan as Dr. HillWes Heywood as Commercial NarratorNico Woulard as Hanged ChildCarol Nielson as Hanged FemaleKeith Woulard as Hanged MaleJodi Dawson as Burnt TeacherTony Donnelly as Gunshot BoyRonnie Lea as SecretaryCarlos X. Lpez as Spanish Ghost on TapeGino Inverso as Young VincentEllen Sheppard as Mrs. SloanAFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills  No. 60AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"I see dead people."  No. 44

"I see dead people."  No. 44AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  No. 89"I see dead people."  No. 44The Sixth Sense at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Sixth Sense at AllRoviThe Sixth Sense at Rotten TomatoesThe Sixth Sense  M. Night Shyamalan OnlineRecognition Values: Seeing The Sixth Sense Again for the First Time, essay by Laurence A. Richels, Other Voices, March 2002.Radio Interview with Sixth Sense Producer Frank Marshall from FBi 94.5 Sydney AustraliaThe Jazz Singer is a 1927 American musical film. The first feature-length motion picture with synchronized dialogue sequences, its release heralded the commercial ascendance of the "talkies" and the decline of the silent film era. Produced by Warner Bros. with its Vitaphone sound-on-disc system, the movie stars Al Jolson, who performs six songs. Directed by Alan Crosland, it is based on a play by Samson Raphaelson.The story begins with young Jakie Rabinowitz defying the traditions of his devout Jewish family by singing popular tunes in a beer hall. Punished by his father, a cantor, Jakie runs away from home. Some years later, now calling himself Jack Robin, he has become a talented jazz singer. He attempts to build a career as an entertainer, but his professional ambitions ultimately come into conflict with the demands of his home and heritage.On April 25, 1917, Samson Raphaelson, a native of New York City's Lower East Side and a University of Illinois undergraduate, attended a performance of the musical Robinson Crusoe, Jr. in Champaign, Illinois. The star of the show was a thirty-year-old singer, Al Jolson, a Russian-born Jew who performed in blackface.[1] In a 1927 interview, Raphaelson described the experience: "I shall never forget the first five minutes of Jolsonhis velocity, the amazing fluidity with which he shifted from a tremendous absorption in his audience to a tremendous absorption in his song."[1] He explained that he had seen emotional intensity like Jolson's only among synagogue cantors.A few years later, pursuing a professional literary career, Raphaelson wrote "The Day of Atonement", a short story about a young Jew named Jakie Rabinowitz, based on Jolson's real life. The story was published in January 1922 in Everybody's Magazine.[2] Raphaelson later adapted the story into a stage play, The Jazz Singer. A straight drama, all the singing in Raphaelson's version takes place offstage.[3] With George Jessel in the lead role, the show premiered on Broadway in September 1925 and became a hit.[4] Warner Bros. acquired the movie rights to the play on June 4, 1926, and signed Jessel to a contract.[5] Moving Picture World published a story in February 1927 announcing that production on the film would begin with Jessel on May 1.[6]But the plans to make the film with Jessel would fall through, for multiple reasons. Jessel's contract with Warner Bros. had not anticipated that the movie they had particularly signed him for would be made with sound (he'd made a modestly budgeted, silent comedy in the interim). When Warners had hits with two Vitaphone, though dialogue-less, features in late 1926, The Jazz Singer production had been reconceived.[5] Jessel asked for a bonus or a new contract, but was rebuffed. According to Jessel's description in his autobiography, Harry Warner "was having a tough time with the financing of the company.... He talked about taking care of me if the picture was a success. I did not feel that was enough."[7] In fact, around the beginning of 1927, Harry Warnerthe eldest of the brothers who ran the eponymous studiohad sold $4 million of his personal stock to keep the studio solvent.[5] Then came another major issue. According to Jessel, a first read of screenwriter Alfred A. Cohn's adaptation "threw me into a fit. Instead of the boy's leaving the theatre and following the traditions of his father by singing in the synagogue, as in the play, the picture scenario had him return to the Winter Garden as a blackface comedian, with his mother wildly applauding in the box. I raised hell. Money or no money, I would not do this."[8]According to performer Eddie Cantor, as negotiations between Warner Bros. and Jessel foundered, Jack Warner and the studio's production chief, Darryl Zanuck, called to see if he was interested in the part. Cantor, a friend of Jessel's, responded that he was sure any differences with the actor could be worked out and offered his assistance.[9] Cantor was not invited to participate in the Jessel talks; instead, the role was then offered to Jolson, who had inspired it in the first place. Describing Jolson as the production's best choice for its star, film historian Donald Crafton wrote, "The entertainer, who sang jazzed-up minstrel numbers in blackface, was at the height of his phenomenal popularity. Anticipating the later stardom of crooners and rock stars, Jolson electrified audiences with the vitality and sex appeal of his songs and gestures, which owed much to African-American sources."[10] As described by historian Robert L. Carringer, "Jessel was a vaudeville comedian and master of ceremonies with one successful play and one modestly successful film to his credit. Jolson was a superstar."[11] Jolson took the part, signing a $75,000 contract on May 26, 1927, for eight weeks of services beginning in July.[12] There have been several claims but no proof that Jolson invested some of his own money in the film.[13] Jessel and Jolson, also friends, did not speak for some time afteron the one hand, Jessel had been confiding his problems with the Warners to Jolson; on the other, Jolson had signed with them without telling Jessel of his plans. In his autobiography, Jessel wrote that, in the end, Jolson "must not be blamed, as the Warners had definitely decided that I was out."[14]While many earlier sound films had dialogue, all were short subjects. D. W. Griffith's feature Dream Street (1921) was shown in New York with a single singing sequence and crowd noises. It was preceded by a program of sound shorts, including a sequence with Griffith speaking directly to the audience, but the feature itself had no talking scenes.[15] Similarly, the first Warner Bros. Vitaphone features, Don Juan (premiered August 1926) and The Better 'Ole (premiered October 1926), like two more that followed in early 1927, had only a synchronized instrumental score and sound effects. The Jazz Singer contains those, as well as numerous synchronized singing sequences and some synchronized speech: Two popular tunes are performed by the young Jakie Rabinowitz, the future Jazz Singer; his father, a cantor, performs the devotional Kol Nidre; the famous cantor Yossele Rosenblatt, appearing as himself, sings another religious melody, Kaddish. As the adult Jack Robin, Jolson performs six songs, five popular "jazz" tunes and the Kol Nidre. The sound for the film was recorded by British-born George Groves, who had also worked on Don Juan. To direct, the studio chose Alan Crosland, who already had two Vitaphone films to his credit: Don Juan and Old San Francisco, which opened while The Jazz Singer was in production.Jolson's first vocal performance, about fifteen minutes into the picture, is of "Dirty Hands, Dirty Face," with music by James V. Monaco and lyrics by Edgar Leslie and Grant Clarke. The first synchronized speech, uttered by Jack to a cabaret crowd and to the piano player in the band that accompanies him, occurs directly after that performance, beginning at the 17:25 mark of the film. Jack's first spoken words"Wait a minute, wait a minute, you ain't heard nothin' yet"were well-established stage patter of Jolson's. He had even spoken very similar lines in a 1926 short, Al Jolson in "A Plantation Act."[16] The line had developed as something of an in-joke. In November 1918, during a gala concert celebrating the end of World War I, Jolson ran onstage amid the applause for the preceding performer, the great operatic tenor Enrico Caruso, and exclaimed, "Folks, you ain't heard nothin' yet."[17] The following year, he recorded the song "You Ain't Heard Nothin' Yet".[18] In a later scene, Jack talks with his mother, played by Eugenie Besserer, in the family parlor; his father enters and pronounces one very conclusive word.In total, the movie contains barely two minutes worth of synchronized talking, much or all of it improvised. The rest of the dialogue is presented through the caption cards, or intertitles, standard in silent movies of the era; as was common, those titles were composed not by the film's scenarist, Alfred Cohn, but by another writer  in this case, Jack Jarmuth.[19]While Jolson was touring with a stage show during June 1927, production on The Jazz Singer began with the shooting of exterior scenes. In late June, Alan Crosland headed to New York City to shoot the Lower East Side and Winter Garden exteriors on location. Jolson joined the production in mid-July (his contract specified July 11). Filming with Jolson began with his silent scenes; the more complex Vitaphone sequences were primarily done in late August.[20] Both Jolson and Zanuck would later take credit for thinking up the ad-libbed dialogue sequence between Jack and his mother; another story had it that Sam Warner was impressed by Jolson's brief ad-libbing in the cabaret scene and had Cohn come up with some lines on the spot.[21] On September 23, Motion Picture News reported that production on the film had been completed.[22]The production cost for The Jazz Singer was $422,000[23]a large sum, especially for Warner Bros., which rarely spent more than $250,000. It was by no means a record for the studio, however; two features starring John Barrymore had been costlier: The Sea Beast (1926), a loose and entirely silent adaptation of Moby-Dick, at $503,000 and Don Juan at $546,000.[24] Nonetheless, the outlay constituted a major gamble in light of the studio's financial straits: Harry Warner had stopped taking a salary and his daughter Doris "recalled that Harry had pawned his wife's jewelry and moved the family into a small apartment at the time The Jazz Singer was in production."[25]The premiere was set for October 6, 1927, at Warner Bros.' flagship theater in New York City. The choice of date was pure show businessthe following day was Yom Kippur, the Jewish holiday around which much of the movie's plot revolves.[26] The buildup to the premiere was tense. Besides Warner Bros.' precarious financial position, the physical presentation of the film itself was remarkably complex:Each of Jolson's musical numbers was mounted on a separate reel with a separate accompanying sound disc. Even though the film was only eighty-nine minutes long...there were fifteen reels and fifteen discs to manage, and the projectionist had to be able to thread the film and cue up the Vitaphone records very quickly. The least stumble, hesitation, or human error would result in public and financial humiliation for the company.[27]None of the Warner brothers were able to attend: Sam Warneramong them, the strongest advocate for Vitaphonehad died the previous day of pneumonia, and the surviving brothers had returned to California for his funeral.[21]According to Doris Warner, who was in attendance, about halfway through the film she began to feel that something exceptional was taking place. Jolson's "Wait a minute" line had prompted a loud, positive response from the audience. Applause followed each of his songs. Excitement built, and when Jolson and Eugenie Besserer began their dialogue scene, "the audience became hysterical."[28] After the show, the audience turned into a "milling, battling, mob", in one journalist's description, chanting "Jolson, Jolson, Jolson!"[27] Among those who reviewed the film, the critic who foresaw most clearly what it presaged for the future of cinema was Life magazine's Robert E. Sherwood. He described the spoken dialogue scene between Jolson and Besserer as "fraught with tremendous significance.... I for one suddenly realized that the end of the silent drama is in sight".[29]Critical reaction was generally, though far from universally, positive. New York Times critic Mordaunt Hall, reviewing the film's premiere, declared thatnot since the first presentation of Vitaphone features, more than a year ago [i.e., Don Juan], has anything like the ovation been heard in a motion-picture theatre.... The Vitaphoned songs and some dialogue have been introduced most adroitly. This in itself is an ambitious move, for in the expression of song the Vitaphone vitalizes the production enormously. The dialogue is not so effective, for it does not always catch the nuances of speech or inflections of the voice so that one is not aware of the mechanical features.[30]Variety called it "[u]ndoubtedly the best thing Vitaphone has ever put on the screen...[with] abundant power and appeal."[31] Richard Watts, Jr. of the New York Herald Tribune called it a "pleasantly sentimental orgy dealing with a struggle between religion and art.... [T]his is not essentially a motion picture, but rather a chance to capture for comparative immortality the sight and sound of a great performer."[27] The Exhibitors Herald's take was virtually identical: "scarcely a motion picture. It should be more properly labeled an enlarged Vitaphone record of Al Jolson in half a dozen songs."[21] The film received favorable reviews in both the Jewish press and in African American newspapers such as the Baltimore Afro-American, the New York Amsterdam News, and the Pittsburgh Courier.[32] The headline of the Los Angeles Times review told a somewhat different story: "'Jazz Singer' Scores a HitVitaphone and Al Jolson Responsible, Picture Itself Second Rate."[33] Photoplay dismissed Jolson as "no movie actor. Without his Broadway reputation he wouldn't rate as a minor player."[29]The film developed into a major hit, demonstrating the profit potential of feature-length "talkies", but Donald Crafton has shown that the reputation the film later acquired for being one of Hollywood's most enormous successes to date was inflated. The movie did well, but not astonishingly so, in the major cities where it was first released, garnering much of its impressive profits with long, steady runs in population centers large and small all around the country. As conversion of movie theaters to sound was still in its early stages, the film actually arrived at many of those secondary venues in a silent version. On the other hand, Crafton's statement that The Jazz Singer "was in a distinct second or third tier of attractions compared to the most popular films of the day and even other Vitaphone talkies" is also incorrect.[34] In fact, the film was easily the biggest earner in Warner Bros. history, and would remain so until it was surpassed a year later by The Singing Fool, another Jolson feature. In the larger scope of Hollywood, among films originally released in 1927, available evidence suggests that The Jazz Singer was among the three biggest box office hits, trailing only Wings and, perhaps, The King of Kings.[35] Industry scholars Alex Ben Block and Lucy Autrey Wilson, for instance, estimate that The Jazz Singer grossed $3.9 million at the domestic box office, while Wings, made for five times the cost, took in $4.3 million. It ultimately returned a worldwide theatrical gross rental of approximately $2.6 million, making a profit of $1,196,750.[36]One of the keys to the film's success was an innovative marketing scheme conceived by Sam Morris, Warner Bros.' sales manager. In Crafton's description:[A] special clause in Warners' Vitaphone exhibition contract virtually guaranteed long runs. Theaters had to book The Jazz Singer for full rather than split weeks. Instead of the traditional flat rental fee, Warners took a percentage of the gate. A sliding scale meant that the exhibitor's take increased the longer the film was held over. The signing of this contract by the greater New York Fox circuit was regarded as a headline-making precedent.[23]Similar arrangements, based on a percentage of the gross rather than flat rental fees, would soon become standard for the U.S. film industry's high-end or "A" product.Though in retrospect, the success of The Jazz Singer signaled the end of the silent motion picture era, this was not immediately apparent. Mordaunt Hall, for example, praised Warner Bros. for "astutely realiz[ing] that a film conception of The Jazz Singer was one of the few subjects that would lend itself to the use of the Vitaphone."[30] In historian Richard Koszarski's words, "Silent films did not disappear overnight, nor did talking films immediately flood the theaters.... Nevertheless, 1927 remains the year that Warner Bros. moved to close the book on the history of silent pictures, even if their original goal had been somewhat more modest."[37]The film had other effects that were more immediate. George Jessel, who was in his third season touring with the stage production of The Jazz Singer, later described what happened to his showperhaps anticipating how sound would soon cement Hollywood's dominance of the American entertainment industry: "A week or two after the Washington engagement the sound-and-picture version of The Jazz Singer with Al Jolson was sweeping the country, and I was swept out of business. I couldn't compete with a picture theatre across the street showing the first great sound picture in the world...for fifty cents, while the price at my theatre was $3.00."[38]As the truly pivotal event, Crafton points to the national release of the film's sound version in early 1928he dates it to January,[23] Block and Wilson to February 4.[19] In March, Warners announced that The Jazz Singer was playing at a record 235 theaters (though many could still show it only silently).[23] In May, a consortium including the leading Hollywood studios signed up with Western Electric's licensing division, ERPI, for sound conversion. In July, Warner Bros. released the first all-talking feature, Lights of New York, a musical crime melodrama. On September 27, The Jazz Singer became the first feature-length talking picture to be shown in Europe when it premiered at London's Piccadilly Theatre. The movie "created a sensation", according to British film historian Rachael Low. "The Jazz Singer was a turning point [for the introduction of sound]. The Bioscope greeted it with, 'We are inclined to wonder why we ever called them Living Pictures.'"[39] The Paris sound premiere followed in January 1929.[40]Before the 1st Academy Awards ceremony was held in May 1929, honoring films released between August 1927 and July 1928, The Jazz Singer was ruled ineligible for the two top prizesthe Outstanding Picture, Production and the Unique and Artistic Productionon the basis that it would have been unfair competition for the silent pictures under consideration.[41] By mid-1929, Hollywood was producing almost exclusively sound films; by the end of the following year, the same was true in much of Western Europe. Jolson went on to make a series of movies for Warners, including The Singing Fool, a part-talkie, and the all-talking features Say It with Songs (1929), Mammy (1930), and Big Boy (1930).Three subsequent screen versions of The Jazz Singer have been produced: a 1952 remake, starring Danny Thomas and Peggy Lee;[42] a 1959 television remake, starring Jerry Lewis; and a 1980 remake starring Neil Diamond, Lucie Arnaz, and Laurence Olivier.[43] The Jazz Singer was adapted as a one-hour radio play on two broadcasts of Lux Radio Theater, both starring Al Jolson, reprising his screen role. The first aired August 10, 1936; the second on June 2, 1947.The Jazz Singer was parodied as early as 1936, in the Warner Bros. cartoon I Love to Singa, directed by Tex Avery. Its hero is "Owl Jolson", a young owl who croons popular ditties, such as the title song, against the wishes of his father, a classical music teacher.[44] Among the many references to The Jazz Singer in popular culture, perhaps the most notable is that of the classic MGM musical Singin' in the Rain (1952). The story, set in 1927, revolves around efforts to change a silent film production, The Dueling Cavalier, into a talking picture in response to The Jazz Singer's success. The plot of the Simpsons episode "Like Father, Like Clown" (1991) parallels the tale of Jakie Rabinowitz/Jack Robin.[45] Krusty the Clown's rabbi father disapproves of his son's choice to be a comedian, telling him, "You have brought shame on our family! Oh, if you were a musician or a jazz singer, this I could forgive."[46] The Jazz Singer's story continues to be evoked in pictures such as Warner Bros.' animated Happy Feet (2006).[47]According to film historian Krin Gabbard, The Jazz Singer "provides the basic narrative for the lives of jazz and popular musicians in the movies. If this argument means that sometime after 1959 the narrative must belong to pop rockers, it only proves the power of the original 1927 film to determine how Hollywood tells the stories of popular musicians."[48] More broadly, he also suggests that this "seemingly unique film" has "become a paradigm for American success stories."[49] More specifically, he examines a cycle of biopics of white jazz musicians stretching from The Birth of the Blues (1941) to The Five Pennies (1959) that trace their roots to The Jazz Singer.[50]In 1996, The Jazz Singer was selected for preservation in the U.S. Library of Congress's National Film Registry of "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant" motion pictures. In 1998, the film was chosen in voting conducted by the American Film Institute as one of the best American films of all time, ranking at number ninety.[51] In 2007, a three-disc deluxe DVD edition of the film was released. The supplemental material includes Jolson's 1926 Vitaphone short, A Plantation Act.Jack Robin's use of blackface in his Broadway stage act is the primary focus of many Jazz Singer studies. Its crucial and unusual role is described by scholar Corin Willis:In contrast to the racial jokes and innuendo brought out in its subsequent persistence in early sound film, blackface imagery in The Jazz Singer is at the core of the film's central theme, an expressive and artistic exploration of the notion of duplicity and ethnic hybridity within American identity. Of the more than seventy examples of blackface in early sound film 192753 that I have viewed (including the nine blackface appearances Jolson subsequently made), The Jazz Singer is unique in that it is the only film where blackface is central to the narrative development and thematic expression.[52]The function and meaning of blackface in the film is intimately involved with Jack's own Jewish heritage and his desire to make his mark in mass American culturemuch as the ethnically Jewish Jolson and the Warner brothers were doing themselves. Jack Robin "compounds both tradition and stardom. The Warner Brothers thesis is that, really to succeed, a man must first acknowledge his ethnic self," argues W. T. Lhamon. "[T]he whole film builds toward the blacking-up scene at the dress rehearsal. Jack Robin needs the blackface mask as the agency of his compounded identity. Blackface will hold all the identities together without freezing them in a singular relationship or replacing their parts."[53]Seymour Stark's view is less sanguine. In describing Jolson's extensive experience performing in blackface in stage musicals, he asserts, "The immigrant Jew as Broadway star...works within a blackface minstrel tradition that obscures his Jewish pedigree, but proclaims his white identity. Jolson's slight Yiddish accent was hidden by a Southern veneer."[54] Arguing that The Jazz Singer actually avoids honestly dealing with the tension between American assimilation and Jewish identity, he claims that its "covert message...is that the symbol of blackface provides the Jewish immigrant with the same rights and privileges accorded to earlier generations of European immigrants initiated into the rituals of the minstrel show."[55]Lisa Silberman Brenner contradicts this view. She returns to the intentions expressed by Samson Raphaelson, on whose play the film's script was closely based: "For Raphaelson, jazz is prayer, American style, and the blackface minstrel the new Jewish cantor. Based on the author's own words, the play is not about blackface as a means for Jews to become White, but about blackface as a means for Jews to express a new kind of Jewishness, that of the modern American Jew."[56] She observes that during the same period, the Jewish press was noting with pride that Jewish performers were adopting aspects of African American music.According to Scott Eyman, the film "marks one of the few times Hollywood Jews allowed themselves to contemplate their own central cultural myth, and the conundrums that go with it. The Jazz Singer implicitly celebrates the ambition and drive needed to escape the shtetls of Europe and the ghettos of New York, and the attendant hunger for recognition. Jack, Sam, and Harry [Warner] let Jack Robin have it all: the satisfaction of taking his father's place and of conquering the Winter Garden. They were, perhaps unwittingly, dramatizing some of their own ambivalence about the debt first-generation Americans owed their parents."[57]Cantor Rabinowitz wants his son to carry on the generations-old family tradition and become a cantor at the synagogue in the Jewish ghetto of Manhattan's Lower East Side. But down at the beer garden, thirteen-year-old Jakie Rabinowitz is performing popular, so-called jazz, tunes. Moisha Yudelson spots the boy and tells Jakie's father, who drags him home. Jakie clings to his mother, Sara, as his father declares, "I'll teach him better than to debase the voice God gave him!" Jakie threatens: "If you whip me again, I'll run away  and never come back!" After the whipping, Jakie kisses his mother goodbye and, true to his word, runs away. At the Yom Kippur service, Rabinowitz mournfully tells a fellow celebrant, "My son was to stand at my side and sing tonight  but now I have no son." As the sacred Kol Nidre is sung, Jakie sneaks back home to retrieve a picture of his loving mother.Approximately ten years later, Jakie has changed his name to the more assimilated Jack Robin. Jack is called up from his table at a cabaret to perform on stage. He belts out "'Dirty Hands, Dirty Face," which is enthusiastically received, then addresses the crowd with the live-recorded, spoken words that made motion picture history:Jack wows the crowd with his energized rendition. Afterward, he is introduced to the beautiful Mary Dale, a musical theater dancer. "There are lots of jazz singers, but you have a tear in your voice," she says, offering to help with his budding career.Back at the family home Jack left long ago, the elder Rabinowitz instructs a young student in the traditional cantorial art. Jack's visibly aged mother receives a letter that Yudleson reads to her:Dear Mama: I'm getting along great, making $250.00 a week. A wonderful girl, Mary Dale, got me my big chance. Write me c/o State Theatre in Chicago. Last time you forgot and addressed me Jakie Rabinowitz. Jack Robin is my name now. Your loving son, Jakie.Sara wonders if he has departed from his religious roots and become romantically involved with a "shiksa". When she shows her husband the letter, he is furious: "We have no son!"With Mary's help, Jack has gained a place on the vaudeville circuit and now travels constantly around the country. For one glorious week, their paths have crossed in Chicago. Now they must part for an indefinite period as Mary has won a lead role in a Broadway show. Jack attends a concert of sacred songs performed by renowned cantor Yossele Rosenblatt and is reminded poignantly of his father. About to board a train for the next stop on the circuit, Jack learns that he's won a shot at the big time: a spot in a Broadway revue, which will bring him close to both Mary and his treasured mother.At the Rabinowitz home, Sara organizes presents that have arrived in celebration of her husband's sixtieth birthday. It is also the day of Jack's return, and he surprises his mother with an expensive piece of jewelry. At his father's piano, he sings and plays Irving Berlin's "Blue Skies" for her. Then, as Jack continues to tinkle on the piano with his left hand throughout, comes the first true dialogue sequence ever heard in a feature-length film (Sara's lines, for the most part, are not fully enunciated, and at times are difficult to understand amid her frequent giggles):Sara: Yes...Jack: I'm glad of it. I'd rather please you than anybody I know of. Oh, darlin', will you gimme something?Sara: What?Jack: You'll never guess. Shut your eyes, Mama. Shut 'em for little Jakie [pronounced "Jack-ee," not "Jayk-ee"]. Haw, I'm gonna steal something [he kisses her]. Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!Sara: Oh, Jakie, oh...Jack: I'll give it back to you someday too, you see if I don't. Mama darling, if I'm a success in this show, well, we're gonna move from here.Sara: Oh, no.Jack: Oh yes, we're gonna move up in the Bronx. A lot of nice green grass up there, and a whole lot of people you know. There's the Ginsbergs, the Guttenbergs, and the Goldbergs. Oh, a whole lot of Bergs. I don't know 'em all. And I'm gonna buy you a nice black silk dress, Mama.Sara: Ohh...Jack: You'll see, Mrs. Friedman, the butcher's wife, she'll be jealous of you.Sara: Oh, no...Jack: Yes she will. You'll see if she isn't. And I'm going to get you a nice pink dress that will go with your brown eyes.Sara: Oh, no, Jakie, no. I...I...Jack: What do you mean, "no"?Sara: Oh, no, dear.Jack: Who, who is tellin' ya? What do you mean, "no"? Yes, you'll wear pink or else. Or else you'll wear pink. Hm, hm, hm, hm. And darlin', ohh, I'm gonna take you to Coney Island.Sara: Yeah?Jack: Yes, you're gonna ride on the shoot-the-chute.Sara: Oh ho...Jack: And you know the dark mill.Sara: Yeah?Jack: Ever been in the dark mill?Sara: Oh, no, I wouldn't.Jack: Well, with me it's alright. I'll kiss ya and hug yayou'll see if I don't. Now Mama, Mama, stop now, you're gettin' kittenish. Mama, listen, I'm gonna sing this like I will if I go on the stage, you know, with the show. I'm gonna sing it jazzy. Now get this.Having performed a relatively straightforward version of the song, Jack now demonstrates for his mother the energetic method with which he plans to perform it on Broadway. In the middle of the song, he interjects, referring to his flamboyant piano style,Jack's father enters and watches Jack perform for a few moments. Stunned, he shouts the last recorded line of speech in the movie:Jack tries to explain his modern point of view, but the appalled cantor banishes him: "I never want to see you again  you jazz singer!" As he leaves, Jack makes a prediction: "I came home with a heart full of love, but you don't want to understand. Some day you'll understand, the same as Mama does."Two weeks after Jack's expulsion from the family home and twenty-four hours before opening night of April Follies on Broadway, Jack's father falls gravely ill. Jack is asked to choose between the show and duty to his family and faith: in order to sing the Kol Nidre for Yom Kippur in his father's place, he will have to miss the big premiere.That evening, the eve of Yom Kippur, Yudleson tells the Jewish elders, "For the first time, we have no Cantor on the Day of Atonement." Lying in his bed, weak and gaunt, Cantor Rabinowitz tells Sara that he cannot perform on the most sacred of holy days: "My son came to me in my dreams  he sang Kol Nidre so beautifully. If he would only sing like that tonight  surely he would be forgiven."As Jack prepares for a dress rehearsal by applying blackface makeup, he and Mary discuss his career aspirations and the family pressures they agree he must resist. Sara and Yudleson comes to Jack's dressing room to plea for him to come to his father and sing in his stead. Jack is torn. He delivers his blackface performance ("Mother of Mine, I Still Have You"), and Sara sees her son onstage for the first time. She has a tearful revelation: "Here he belongs. If God wanted him in His house, He would have kept him there. He's not my boy anymore  he belongs to the whole world now."Afterward, Jack returns to the Rabinowitz home. He kneels at his father's bedside and the two converse fondly: "My son  I love you." Sara suggests that it may help heal his father if Jack takes his place at the Yom Kippur service. Mary arrives with the producer, who warns Jack that he'll never work on Broadway again if he fails to appear on opening night. Jack can't decide. Mary challenges him: "Were you lying when you said your career came before everything?" Jack is unsure if he even can replace his father: "I haven't sung Kol Nidre since I was a little boy." His mother tells him, "Do what is in your heart, Jakie  if you sing and God is not in your voice  your father will know." The producer cajoles Jack: "You're a jazz singer at heart!"At the theater, the opening night audience is told that there will be no performance. Jack sings the Kol Nidre in his father's place. His father listens from his deathbed to the nearby ceremony and speaks his last, forgiving words: "Mama, we have our son again." The spirit of Jack's father is shown at his side in the synagogue. Mary has come to listen. She sees how Jack has reconciled the division in his soul: "a jazz singer  singing to his God.""The season passes  and time heals  the show goes on." Jack, as "The Jazz Singer," is now appearing at the Winter Garden theater, apparently as the featured performer opening for a show called Back Room. In the front row of the packed theater, his mother sits alongside Yudleson. Jack, in blackface, performs the song "My Mammy" for her and for the world.October 6, 1927(1927-10-06)1 Background and production

1.1 From concept to choosing a star
1.2 Introducing sound

1.1 From concept to choosing a star1.2 Introducing sound2 Premiere and reception3 Commercial impact and industrial influence4 Legacy5 Critical analysis6 Cast7 Plot summary (with complete recorded dialogue)8 Songs9 Awards and nominations

9.1 Award
9.2 Nominations

9.1 Award9.2 Nominations10 Notes11 Sources12 External links1.1 From concept to choosing a star1.2 Introducing sound9.1 Award9.2 NominationsAl Jolson as Jakie Rabinowitz (Jack Robin)May McAvoy as Mary DaleWarner Oland as Cantor RabinowitzYossele Rosenblatt as himselfEugenie Besserer as Sara RabinowitzOtto Lederer as Moisha YudelsonBobby Gordon as Jakie Rabinowitz (age 13)Richard Tucker as Harry Lee"My Gal Sal" (music and lyrics by Paul Dresser; dubbed by unknown singer with Bobby Gordon onscreen)[58]"Waiting for the Robert E. Lee" (music by Lewis F. Muir and lyrics by L. Wolfe Gilbert; dubbed by unknown singer with Bobby Gordon onscreen)[58]"Kol Nidre" (traditional; dubbed by Joseph Diskay with Warner Oland onscreen;[58] sung also by Al Jolson)"Dirty Hands, Dirty Face" (music by James V. Monaco and lyrics by Edgar Leslie and Grant Clarke; sung by Al Jolson)"Toot, Toot, Tootsie (Goo' Bye)" (music and lyrics by Gus Kahn, Ernie Erdman, and Dan Russo [title orthography and songwriting credits per original sheet music cover;[59] some other sources do not mention Russo and some also name either or both Ted Fio Rito and Robert A. King]; sung by Al Jolson)"Kaddish" (traditional; sung by Cantor Yossele Rosenblatt)"Blue Skies" (music and lyrics by Irving Berlin; sung by Al Jolson)"Mother of Mine, I Still Have You" (music by Louis Silvers and lyrics by Grant Clarke [Jolson also credited by some sources]; sung by Al Jolson)"My Mammy" (music by Walter Donaldson and lyrics by Sam M. Lewis and Joe Young; sung by Al Jolson)Special Academy Award to Warner Bros. production chief Darryl F. Zanuck "for producing The Jazz Singer, the pioneer outstanding talking picture, which has revolutionized the industry"Academy Award for Writing Adapted Screenplay  Alfred A. CohnAcademy Award for Engineering Effects  Nugent SlaughterDon Juan (nontalking)/premiered August 6, 1926: $1.695 million total (domestic & foreign) [new Warner Bros. record]



Thomas Schatz (1998) claims that Don Juan "was much less successful than the previous Barrymore vehicle, The Sea Beast" (p. 63). This claim is belied by Glancy's figures, which show total earnings of $938,000 for The Sea Beast [p. 2 online].



The Better 'Ole (nontalking)/premiered October 7, 1926: just over $1 million total (dom. & for.)When a Man Loves (nontalking)/premiered February 3, 1927: just over $1 million total (dom. & for.)Old San Francisco (nontalking)/premiered June 21, 1927: $638,000 total (dom. & for.)The Jazz Singer (part-talkie)/premiered October 6, 1927: $2.625 million total (dom. & for.) [new Warner Bros. record]/$1.97 million domestic



These figures apparently include earnings from the film's 1931 rerelease. While no authoritative source has broken out those numbers from those of the initial release, even if they constitute as much as 25 percent of the total (a generous assumption), The Jazz Singer still set a Warner Bros. record in its initial release and was one of the top films of the 192728 exhibition season.



Tenderloin (part-talkie)/premiered March 14, 1928: just under $1 million total (dom. & for.)Glorious Betsy (part-talkie)/premiered April 26, 1928: just under $1 million total (dom. & for.)The Lion and the Mouse (part-talkie)/premiered May 21, 1928: just under $1 million total (dom. & for.)Lights of New York (all-talking)/premiered July 6, 1928: $1.252 million total (dom. & for.)The Singing Fool (part-talkie)/premiered September 19, 1928: $5.916 million total (dom. & for.) [new Warner Bros. record]Block, Alex Ben, and Lucy Autrey Wilson, eds. (2010). George Lucas's Blockbusting: A Decade-by-Decade Survey of Timeless Movies Including Untold Secrets of Their Financial and Cultural Success. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-177889-6Bloom, Ken (2004). Broadway: Its History, People, and PlacesAn Encyclopedia. New York and London: Routledge/Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0-415-93704-3Bradley, Edwin M. (2004). The First Hollywood Musicals: A Critical Filmography of 171 Features, 1927 Through 1932. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland. ISBN 0-7864-2029-4Brenner, Lisa Silberman (2003). "Blackface as Religious Expression," Cross Currents, fall (available online).Carringer, Robert L. (1979). The Jazz Singer. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. ISBN 0-299-07664-4Crafton, Donald (1999 [1997]). The Talkies: American Cinema's Transition to Sound, 19261931. Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-22128-1Crisp, Colin G. (1997). The Classic French Cinema, 19301960. Bloomington/London: Indiana University Press/I. B. Tauris. ISBN 0-253-21115-8Eyman, Scott (1997). The Speed of Sound: Hollywood and the Talkie Revolution, 19261930. New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 0-684-81162-6Finler, Joel W. (1988). The Hollywood Story. New York: Crown. ISBN 0-517-56576-5Gabbard, Krin (1996). Jammin' at the Margins: Jazz and the American Cinema. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 0-226-27789-5Glancy, H. Mark (1995). "Warner Bros. Film Grosses, 192151: The William Schaefer Ledger," Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television, March (available online).Gomery, Douglas (2005). The Coming of Sound: A History. New York and Oxon, UK: Routledge/Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0-415-96900-XHall, Mordaunt (1927). "Al Jolson and the Vitaphone [review of The Jazz Singer]", New York Times, October 7 (available online).Harrison-Kahan, Lori (20110. The White Negress: Literature, Minstrelsy, and the Black-Jewish Imaginary. Piscataway, N.J.: Rutgers University Press. ISBN 978-0-8135-4782-4Jessel, George (2006 [1943]). So Help Me: The Autobiography of George Jessel. Whitefish, Mont.: Kessinger. ISBN 1-4286-5975-7Koszarski, Richard (1994 [1990]). An Evening's Entertainment: The Age of the Silent Feature Picture, 19151928. Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-08535-3Kroll, Jack (1997). "The Movies: They Are The Art Form Of Our Era, A Spectacle That Attracts The Whole World", Newsweek, December 2 (available online).Lhamon, W. T. (1998). Raising Cain: Blackface Performance from Jim Crow to Hip Hop. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-74711-9Low, Rachael (1997 [1971]). The History of the British Film 19181929 (The History of British Film, Volume IV). Oxford and New York: Routledge/Taylor & Francis. ISBN 0-415-15649-1Lusk, Norbert (1927). "'Jazz Singer' Scores a Hit", Los Angeles Times, October 16.Rees, Nigel (1999). Brewer's Famous Quotations: 5000 Quotations and the Stories Behind Them. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. ISBN 0-304-36799-0Rogin, Michael (1998 [1996]). Blackface, White Noise: Jewish Immigrants in the Hollywood Melting Pot. Berkeley, Los Angeles, and London: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-21380-7Schatz, Thomas (1998 [1989]). The Genius of the System: Hollywood Filmmaking in the Studio Era. London: Faber and Faber. ISBN 0-571-19596-2Stark, Seymour (2000). Men in Blackface: True Stories of the Minstrel Show. Bloomington, Ind.: Xlibris. ISBN 0-7388-5735-1Stratton, Jon (2000). Coming Out Jewish: Constructing Ambivalent Identities. New York and London: Routledge. ISBN 0-415-22207-9Variety staff (1927). "The Jazz Singer," Variety (available online).Willis, Corin (2005). "Meaning and Value in The Jazz Singer (Alan Crosland, 1927)," in Style And Meaning: Studies In The Detailed Analysis Of Film, ed. John Gibbs and Douglas Pye. Manchester: Manchester University Press. ISBN 0-7190-6524-0The Jazz Singer at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Jazz Singer at AllRoviThe Jazz Singer promo Vitaphone shortAl Jolson Society Official Website includes clip from The Jazz Singer of Jolson's first onscreen speech and performance of "Toot, Toot, Tootsie" (follow links: His WorkFilmsThe Jazz SingerToot, Toot, Tootsie)Let's Go To The Movies (1948) film clip, with excerpt of "My Mammy" at 2:30; at the Internet ArchiveLux Radio Theater/The Jazz Singer radio version originally broadcast on August 10, 1936; at the Internet ArchiveSwing Time is a 1936 RKO musical comedy film set mainly in New York City and stars Fred Astaire, Ginger Rogers, Helen Broderick, Victor Moore, Eric Blore and Georges Metaxa, with music by Jerome Kern and lyrics by Dorothy Fields. The film was directed by George Stevens.Swing Time is considered by Croce,[2] Mueller[3] and Hyam[4] to be Astaire and Rogers' best dance musical, featuring four dance routines that are each regarded as masterpieces of their kind. "Never Gonna Dance" is often singled out as the partnership's and collaborator Hermes Pan's most profound achievement in filmed dance, while "The Way You Look Tonight" won the Academy Award for Best Original Song and went on to become Astaire's most successful hit record, scoring first place in the U.S. charts in 1936. Kern's score, the second of three he composed specially for Astaire, contains three of his most memorable songs.[5]But while it is considered to be one of Astaire and Rogers' greatest films, the film's plot has been criticized[6] as has the performance of Metaxa.[2][3] More praised is the acting and dancing performance[7] of Ginger Rogers. Rogers herself credited much of the film's success to Stevens: "He gave us a certain quality, I think, that made it stand out above the others."[3] Swing Time also marked the beginning of a decline in popularity of the Astaire-Rogers partnership among the general public, with box office receipts falling faster than usual, after a successful opening.[8] Nevertheless, the film was a sizable hit, costing $886,000 while grossing over $2,600,000 worldwide and showing a net profit of $830,000. Still, the partnership never again quite regained the creative heights scaled in this and previous films.[9]In 1999, Swing Time was one of Entertainment Weekly's top 100 films. In 2004, it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In the new AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) it has been added at #90.John "Lucky" Garnett (Fred Astaire) is a gambler and dancer. He is set to marry Margaret (Betty Furness), but his friends hold him up so that he is late to the wedding. Margaret's father phones to call off the wedding, but Lucky doesn't get that message. His friends bet him that he won't be getting married and he agrees to the bet. Margaret's father tells Lucky that he must earn $25,000 in order to demonstrate his good intentions.He and his friend "Pop" Cardetti (Victor Moore) try to buy train tickets, but his friends take his money - because he lost the bet. So they hitch the first freight train to New York. Broke, they wander around the city. Lucky meets Penny (Ginger Rogers), a dance school instructor, when he asks for change for a quarter. It's his lucky quarter and Pop feels bad that Lucky lost it. They attempt to get it back, but Penny is in no mood to deal with them. When she drops her things, Pop sneaks the quarter out of her purse, and she thinks Lucky did it.They follow Penny to her work. In order to apologize, he needs to take a lesson from her. She's still furious at him. After a disastrous lesson, Penny tells him to "save his money" since he will never learn to dance. Her boss, Mr. Gordon (Eric Blore), overhears her comment and fires her. Lucky dances with Penny to "prove" how much she's taught him. Not only does he give Penny her job back, Mr. Gordon sets up an audition with the owner of a local venue.They check into the same hotel where Penny is staying. Lucky does not have a tuxedo to wear to the audition. He tries to get a tuxedo off a drunk man, but he ends up loses his own clothes instead. They miss the audition and Penny gets mad at Lucky all over again. Lucky arranges another audition. He and Pop picket in front of Penny's door until she gives in and forgives him.But they cannot audition because the club has lost their band leader, Ricardo Romero (Georges Metaxa), to a casino. They go to Club Raymond where Lucky gambles to win enough to get Ricky back. Meanwhile, Ricky declares his feelings for Penny. Lucky is about to win enough to marry Margaret, but his takes his last bet off in time... proving he is no longer interested in her, but in Penny, instead. The club owner bets him double or nothing and they gamble for Ricky's contract. Pop cheats and Lucky wins the contract.Lucky and Penny dance at the club. They are dancing together all the time, but Lucky does not trust himself around Penny because he feels guilty about not telling her about Margaret. He's avoiding her, which Penny notices, so she and her friend Mabel Anderson (Helen Broderick) conspire to get Lucky and Pop out to the country. Pop lets slip the information about Lucky and Margaret.Despite her best efforts, the two begin a romance, even as Ricky continues to woo Penny. When Margaret shows up, Lucky tries to avoid her, but, too late, Penny finds out. She agrees to marry Ricky. Margaret calls off her engagement to Lucky before he can. Lucky successfully stops Penny's wedding. And the two end up together, much to everyone's delight.Astaire introduces two new elements into his approach to filmed song and dance, both of which represent the abandonment of theatrical staging conventions. First is the use of space, horizontally in "A Fine Romance" and vertically in "Never Gonna Dance", and second is the introduction of trick photography in "Bojangles of Harlem". Partnered hopping steps/spins and the satire of self-conscious elegance feature prominently in the choreography, in which Astaire was assisted by Hermes Pan.The film made a profit of $830,000.[1]Since 2005, a digitally restored version of Swing Time is available separately and as part of The Astaire & Rogers Collection, Vol.1 from Warner Home Video. These releases feature a commentary by John Mueller, author of Astaire Dancing - The Musical Films.Since 2003, a digitally restored version of Swing Time (not the same as the US restoration) is available separately, and as part of The Fred and Ginger Collection, Vol. 1 from Universal Studios, who control the rights to the RKO Astaire-Rogers pictures in Europe. These releases feature an introduction by Astaire's daughter, Ava Astaire McKenzie.August 27, 1936(1936-08-27)1 Synopsis2 Cast3 Key songs/dance routines4 Reception5 Contemporary reviews6 Home media

6.1 Region 1
6.2 Region 2

6.1 Region 16.2 Region 27 Notes and references8 External links6.1 Region 16.2 Region 2Fred Astaire as John "Lucky" GarnettGinger Rogers as Penelope "Penny" CarrollVictor Moore as Edwin "Pop" CardettiHelen Broderick as Mabel AndersonBetty Furness as Margaret WatsonGeorges Metaxa as Ricardo RomeroLanders Stevens (George Stevens' father) as Judge Watson"Pick Yourself Up": The first of Kern's standards is a charming polka first sung and then danced to by Astaire and Rogers. One of their most joyous and exuberant numbers is also a technical tour-de-force with the basic polka embellished by syncopated rhythms and overlayed with tap decoration. In particular, Rogers recaptures the spontaneity and commitment that she first displayed in the "I'll Be Hard to Handle" number from Roberta (1935)."The Way You Look Tonight": Kern's classic Oscar-winning foxtrot is sung by Astaire, seated at a piano, while Ginger is busy washing her hair in a side room. Here, Astaire conveys a sunny yet nostalgic romanticism but later, when the music is danced to as part of "Never Gonna Dance", the pair will create a mood of sombre poignancy. As evidence of its enduring appeal, this song is regularly featured in modern cinema and television: as in Chinatown (1974), or My Best Friend's Wedding (1997), and it played a prominent role as the key linking element in the final episode of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine."Waltz in Swing Time": Described by one critic as "the finest piece of pure dance music ever written for Astaire", this is the most virtuosic partnered romantic duet Astaire ever committed to film. Kern - always reluctant to compose in the Swing style - provided some themes to Robert Russell Bennett who, with the assistance of Astaire's rehearsal pianist Hal Borne, produced the final score. The dance is a nostalgic celebration of love, in the form of a syncopated waltz with tap overlays - a concept Astaire later reworked in the similarly impressive "Belle of New York" segment of the "Currier and Ives" routine from The Belle of New York (1952). In the midst of this most complex of routines, Astaire and Rogers find time to gently poke fun at notions of elegance, in a delicate reminder of a similar episode in "Pick Yourself Up"."A Fine Romance": Kern's third standard, a quickstep to Field's bittersweet lyrics, is sung alternately by Rogers and Astaire, with Rogers providing an object lesson in acting while a bowler-hatted Astaire appears at times to be impersonating Stan Laurel. Never a man to discard a favourite piece of fine clothing, Astaire wears the same coat in the opening scene of Holiday Inn (1941)."Bojangles of Harlem": Once again, Kern, Bennett and Borne combined their talents to produce a jaunty instrumental piece ideally suited to Astaire, who here - while overtly paying tribute to Bill Robinson - actually broadens his tribute to African-American tap dancers by dancing in the style of Astaire's one-time teacher John W. Bubbles, and dressing in the style of the character Sportin' Life, whom Bubbles played the year before in Gershwin's Porgy and Bess. Dorothy Fields recounts how Astaire managed to inspire the reluctant Kern by visiting his home and singing while dancing on and around his furniture. It is the only number in which Astaire - again bowler-hatted - appears in blackface. The idea of using trick photography to show Astaire dancing with three of his shadows was invented by Hermes Pan, who also choreographed the opening chorus, after which Astaire dances a short opening solo which features poses mimicking, perhaps satirising, Al Jolson - all of which was captured by Stevens in one take. There follows a two-minute solo of Astaire dancing with his shadows which took three days to shoot. Astaire's choreography exercises every limb and makes extensive use of hand-clappers. This routine earned Hermes Pan an Academy Award nomination for Best Dance Direction."Never Gonna Dance": After Astaire sings Field's memorable closing line: "la belle, la perfectly swell romance" of Kern's haunting ballad, they begin the acknowledgement phase of the dance - possibly their greatest - replete with a poignant nostalgia for their now-doomed affair, where music changes to "The Way You Look Tonight" and they dance slowly in a manner reminiscent of the opening part of "Let's Face The Music And Dance" from Follow the Fleet. At the end of this episode, Astaire adopts a crestfallen, helpless pose. They now begin the denial phase, and again the music changes and speeds up, this time to the "Waltz In Swing Time" while the dancers separate to twirl their way up their respective staircases, escaping to the platform at the top of the Silver Sandal Set - one of the most beautiful Art Deco-influenced Hollywood Moderne creations of Carroll Clark and John Harkrider. Here the music switches again to a frantic, fast-paced, recapitulation of "Never Gonna Dance" as the pair dance a last, desperate, and virtuosic routine before Ginger flees and Astaire repeats his pose of dejection, in a final acceptance of the affair's end. This final routine was shot forty-seven times in one day before Astaire was satisfied, with Rogers' feet left bruised and bleeding by the time they finished.American Dancer, November 1936: "Astaire's dancing can no longer be classified as mere tap, because it is such a perfect blend of tap, modern and ballet, with a generous share of Astaire's personality and good humor...Rogers is vastly improved...but she cannot, as yet, vie with Astaire's amazing agility, superb grace and sophisticated charm. With Astaire one feels, with each succeeding picture, that surely his dancing has reached perfection and marks the end of invention of new steps: and yet he seems to go forward with ease and apparent nonchalence."[10]Dance Magazine, November 1936, Joseph Arnold Kaye: "Much has been written about Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers in Swing Time except, perhaps, one thing: Astaire and Rogers are the picture; everything else seems to have been put in to fill the time between swings. Dance routines are fresh and interesting, dance is superb. When Hollywood will learn to make a dance picture as good as the dancing, we cannot even guess."[10]Variety, 2 September 1936, Abel: "Perhaps a shade under previous par, but it's another box-office and personal winner from the Fred Astaire-Ginger Rogers combo...Film's 103 minutes running time could have been pared to advantage but Swing Time will swing 'em past the wickets in above-average tempo."[10]Swing Time at the Internet Movie DatabaseSwing Time at AllRoviSwing Time at the TCM Movie DatabaseSwing Time at Rotten TomatoesReel ClassicsMy Fair Lady is a 1964 musical film adaptation of the Lerner and Loewe stage musical of the same name, based on the 1938 film adaptation of the original stage play Pygmalion by George Bernard Shaw. Directed by George Cukor, the film depicts misogynistic and arrogant phonetics professor Henry Higgins as he wagers that he can take flower girl Eliza Doolittle (Audrey Hepburn) and turn her Cockney accent into a proper English one, thereby making her presentable in high society. In order to permit Harrison to sing his songs live during filming, the Warner Bros. Studio Sound Department, under the direction of George Groves, implanted a wireless microphone in Harrison's neckties, marking the first time in film history that a wireless mic was used to record sound during filming. The wireless microphone was invented by an American, Raymond A. Litke, in 1957. Litke was the first to patent it, June 8, 1960, U.S. Patent No. 3,134,074. Both the sound department and Harrison earned Academy Awards for their efforts.The film won eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actor, and Best Director.[2]In Edwardian London, Henry Higgins (Rex Harrison), an arrogant, irascible, misogynistic teacher of elocution, believes that the accent and tone of one's voice determines a person's prospects in society. He boasts to a new acquaintance, Colonel Hugh Pickering (Wilfrid Hyde-White), himself an expert in phonetics, that he could teach any woman to speak so "properly" that he could pass her off as a duchess at an embassy ball, citing, as an example, a young flower seller from the slums, Eliza Doolittle (Audrey Hepburn), who has a strong Cockney accent.Eliza goes to Higgins seeking speech lessons. Her great ambition is to work in a flower shop, but her thick accent makes her unsuitable for such a position. All she can afford to pay is a shilling per lesson, whereas Higgins is used to training wealthier members of society.[3] Pickering, who is staying with Higgins, is intrigued by the idea of passing a common flower girl off as a duchess and bets Higgins he cannot make good his boast, offering to pay for the lessons himself.Eliza's father, Alfred P. Doolittle (Stanley Holloway), a dustman, shows up three days later, ostensibly to protect his daughter's virtue, but in reality simply to extract some money from Higgins, and is bought off with 5. Higgins is impressed by the man's honesty, his natural gift for language, and especially his brazen lack of morals - "Can't afford 'em!" claims Doolittle. Higgins recommends Doolittle to a wealthy American who is interested in morality. Eliza goes through many forms of speech training, such as speaking with marbles in her mouth, enduring Higgins' harsh approach to teaching and his treatment of her personally. She makes little progress, but just as she, Higgins, and Pickering are about to give up, Eliza finally "gets it"; she instantly begins to speak with an impeccable upper class accent.As a test, Higgins takes her to Ascot Racecourse, where she makes a good impression with her stilted, but genteel manners, only to shock everyone by a sudden and vulgar lapse into Cockney while encouraging a horse to win a race: "C'mon Dover, move your bloomin' arse!" Higgins, who dislikes the pretentiousness of the upper class, partly conceals a grin behind his hand. Eliza poses as a mysterious lady at an embassy ball and even dances with a foreign prince. At the ball is Zoltan Karpathy (Theodore Bikel), a Hungarian phonetics expert trained by Higgins. After a brief conversation with Eliza, he certifies that she is not only Hungarian, but of royal blood. This makes Higgins' evening, since he has always looked upon Karpathy as a bounder and a crook.After all the effort she has put in however, Eliza is given hardly any credit, all the praise going to Higgins. This, and his callous treatment towards her afterwards, especially his indifference to her future, causes her to walk out on him, leaving him mystified by her ingratitude. Accompanied by Freddy Eynsford-Hill (Jeremy Brett), a young man she met at Ascot and who has strongly become romantically infatuated and charmed by her, Eliza returns to her old stomping ground at Covent Garden, but finds that she no longer fits in as she a polite lady now. She meets her father, who has been left a large fortune by the wealthy American Higgins had sent him to and is resigned to marrying Eliza's stepmother. Alfred feels that Higgins has ruined him, since he is now bound by morals and responsibility. Eventually, Eliza ends up visiting Higgins' mother, who is incensed at her son's behavior.Higgins finds Eliza the next day and attempts to talk her into coming back to him. During a testy exchange, Higgins becomes incensed when Eliza announces that she is going to marry Freddy and become Karpathy's assistant. Higgins explodes and Eliza is satisfied that she has had her "own back." Higgins has to admit that rather than being "a millstone around my neck... now you're a tower of strength, a consort battleship. I like you this way." Eliza leaves, saying they will never meet again. After an argument with his motherin which he asserts that he does not need Eliza or anyone else  Higgins makes his way home, stubbornly predicting that Eliza will come crawling back. However, he comes to the horrified realization that he has "grown accustomed to her face." Then, to his surprise, Eliza reappears in Higgins' study: she knows now that he really deeply cares for her after all.As of 2012, Theodore Bikel is the only surviving member of the main on-screen cast; Marni Nixon is also still alive.The order of the songs in the show was followed faithfully, except for "With a Little Bit of Luck". The song is listed as being the third musical number in the play; in the film it is the fourth. Onstage, the song is split into two parts sung in two different scenes. Part of the song is sung by Doolittle and his cronies just after Eliza gives him part of her earnings, immediately before she makes the decision to go to Higgins's house to ask for speech lessons. The second half of the song is sung by Doolittle just after he discovers that Eliza is now living with Higgins. In the film, the entire song is sung in one scene that takes place just after Higgins has sung "I'm an Ordinary Man". However, the song does have a dialogue scene (Doolittle's conversation with Eliza's landlady) between verses.The instrumental "Busker Sequence", which opens the play immediately after the Overture, is the only musical number from the play omitted in the film version. However, there are several measures from this piece that can be heard as we see Eliza in the rain, making her way through the cars and carriages in Covent Garden.All of the songs in the film were performed almost complete; however, there were some verse omissions, as there sometimes are in film versions of Broadway musicals. For example, in the song "With a Little Bit of Luck" the verse "He does not have a Tuppence in his pocket", which was sung with a chorus, was omitted, due to space and its length. The original verse in "Show Me" was used instead.The stanzas of "You Did It" that came after Higgins says "she is a Princess" were originally written for the Broadway version, but Harrison hated the lyrics and refused to perform them, unless and until those lyrics were omitted, which they were in most Broadway versions. However, Cukor insisted that the omitted lyrics be restored for the film version or he would not direct at all, causing Harrison to oblige. The omitted lyrics end with the words "Hungarian Rhapsody" followed by the servants shouting "BRAVO" three times, to the strains of Liszt's "Hungarian Rhapsody" before the servants sing "Congratulations, Professor Higgins". (Source: "On the Street where I Live" by Alan Jay Lerner, published in 1978.)Hepburn's singing was judged inadequate, and she was dubbed by Marni Nixon,[4] who sang all songs except "Just You Wait", where Hepburn's voice was left undubbed during the harsh-toned chorus of the song and Nixon sang the melodic bridge section. Some of Hepburn's original vocal performances for the film were released in the 1990s, affording audiences an opportunity to judge whether the dubbing was necessary. Less well known is the dubbing of Jeremy Brett's songs (as Freddy) by Bill Shirley.[5]Rex Harrison declined to pre-record his musical numbers for the film, explaining that he had never talked his way through the songs the same way twice and thus couldn't convincingly lip-sync to a playback during filming (as musical stars had, according to Jack Warner, been doing for years. "We even dubbed Rin-Tin-Tin"[6]). To permit Harrison to recite his songs live during filming, the Warner Bros. Studio Sound Department, under the direction of George Groves, implanted a wireless microphone in Harrison's neckties, marking the first known wireless microphone use in film history.[citation needed] Andr Previn then conducted the final version of the music to the voice recording.[citation needed] The sound department earned an Academy Award for its efforts.One of the few differences in structure between the stage version and the film is the placement of the intermission. In the stage play, the intermission comes after the scene at the Embassy Ball where Eliza is seen dancing with Karpathy. In the film, the intermission comes before the ball, as Eliza, Higgins and Pickering are seen departing for the embassy.The art direction was by Cecil Beaton, who won an Oscar. Beaton's inspiration for the library in Henry Higgins' home, where much of the action takes place, was a room at the Chteau de Groussay, Montfort-l'Amaury, in France, which had been decorated opulently by its owner Carlos de Beistegui.The head of CBS, William S. Paley, put up the money for the original Broadway production in exchange for the rights to the cast album (through Columbia Records). When Warner bought the film rights in February 1962 for the then-unprecedented sum of $5 million, it was agreed that the rights to the film would revert to CBS seven years after its release.[7]The first home video release was by MGM/CBS Home Video in 1981, and was re-released by CBS/Fox Video in 1984, 1986, 1991, 1994, and 1996.Warner owned the film's original copyright, but it was renewed by CBS due to the 1971 rights reversion. From 1998-2008, Warner Home Video handled DVD distribution to the film on behalf of CBS Home Entertainment, while CBS Television Distribution owns the television rights. The theatrical distribution rights are currently handled by Hollywood Classics on behalf of Paramount Pictures and CBS.A VHS release by Paramount Pictures in 2001 is currently out of print. However, Paramount obtained DVD rights in 2009 and re-released the film on DVD, on October 6, 2009.[8]The Blu-ray version was released by Paramount Pictures on November 15, 2011.[9]All tracks played by The Warner Bros. Studio Orchestra conducted by Andr Previn. Between brackets the singers.Previously unreleased on LP, included on the CDMy Fair Lady won eight Oscars:[2][10]My Fair Lady won three Golden Globes:American Film Institute recognitionThe film was restored in 1994 by James C. Katz and Robert A. Harris, who had restored Spartacus three years earlier. The restoration was commissioned and financed by CBS, who purchased the film from Warner Bros. in 1971.[11]In 1995 20th Century Fox executives gave animation directors/producers Don Bluth and Gary Goldman, then newly appointed as the creative heads of Fox Animation Studios, the choice between creating an animated remake of either My Fair Lady or the 1956 Fox film, Anastasia. Bluth and Goldman chose to make the animated film Anastasia, which became the highest-grossing non-Disney animated film, in 1997.[12]In June 2008, it was reported that a remake of My Fair Lady was being planned, starring Colin Firth and Keira Knightley[13] as Eliza Doolittle, for release in 2010.[14] It will be produced by Duncan Kenworthy (Love Actually) and Cameron Mackintosh, and co-developed by Columbia Pictures and CBS Films. Emma Thompson was reported to be set to write the script.[15]Others who had tried to get the part of Higgins had included George Clooney and Brad Pitt whose close friendship is reported to have hit a low point as a result.[16] As of March 2010, it was reported that Carey Mulligan has replaced Keira Knightley as the role of Eliza Doolittle.October 21, 1964(1964-10-21)1 Plot2 Cast3 Musical numbers4 Production

4.1 Order of musical numbers
4.2 Dubbing
4.3 Intermission
4.4 Art direction
4.5 Copyright issues
4.6 Blu-ray

4.1 Order of musical numbers4.2 Dubbing4.3 Intermission4.4 Art direction4.5 Copyright issues4.6 Blu-ray5 Soundtrack album as heard on the original LP6 Awards and honors

6.1 Academy Awards: 1964
6.2 Golden Globe Awards
6.3 BAFTA Awards
6.4 Accolades

6.1 Academy Awards: 19646.2 Golden Globe Awards6.3 BAFTA Awards6.4 Accolades7 Restoration8 Possible remake9 References

9.1 Notes

9.1 Notes10 External links4.1 Order of musical numbers4.2 Dubbing4.3 Intermission4.4 Art direction4.5 Copyright issues4.6 Blu-ray6.1 Academy Awards: 19646.2 Golden Globe Awards6.3 BAFTA Awards6.4 Accolades9.1 NotesRex Harrison as Professor Henry HigginsAudrey Hepburn (Marni Nixon, singing) as Eliza DoolittleStanley Holloway as Alfred P. DoolittleWilfrid Hyde-White as Colonel Hugh PickeringGladys Cooper as Mrs. HigginsJeremy Brett (Bill Shirley, singing) as Freddy Eynsford-HillTheodore Bikel as Zoltan KarpathyMona Washbourne as Mrs. Pearce, Higgins' housekeeperIsobel Elsom as Mrs. Eynsford-HillJohn Holland as the ButlerQueenie Leonard as Cockney Bystander (uncredited)Academy Award for Best Picture - Jack WarnerAcademy Award for Directing - George CukorAcademy Award for Best Actor - Rex HarrisonAcademy Award for Best Cinematography - Harry StradlingAcademy Award for Sound - George R. Groves, Warner Brothers StudioAcademy Award for Original Music Score - Andre PrevinAcademy Award for Best Art Direction - Gene Allen, Cecil Beaton and George James HopkinsAcademy Award for Costume Design - Cecil BeatonAcademy Award for Writing Adapted Screenplay - Alan Jay LernerAcademy Award for Film Editing - William ZieglerAcademy Award for Best Supporting Actor - Stanley HollowayAcademy Award for Best Supporting Actress - Gladys CooperGolden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture - Musical or ComedyGolden Globe Award for Best Director - Motion Picture - George CukorGolden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy - Rex HarrisonMy Fair Lady won the BAFTA Award for Best Film from any source.1998 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies #912000 AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs Nominated2002 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions #122004 AFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs:

"I Could Have Danced All Night" #17
"I've Grown Accustomed to Her Face" Nominated
"The Rain in Spain" Nominated

"I Could Have Danced All Night" #17"I've Grown Accustomed to Her Face" Nominated"The Rain in Spain" Nominated2006 AFI's 100 Years of Musicals #82007 AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) Nominated"I Could Have Danced All Night" #17"I've Grown Accustomed to Her Face" Nominated"The Rain in Spain" NominatedLees, Gene (2005). The Musical Worlds of Lerner and Loewe. Publisher: Bison Books ISBN 080328040Green, Benny, Editor (1987). A Hymn to Him: The Lyrics of Alan Jay Lerner. Hal Leonard Corporation. ISBN 0-87910-109-1Lerner, Alan Jay (1985). The Street Where I Live. Da Capo Press. ISBN 0-306-80602-9My Fair Lady at the Internet Movie DatabaseMy Fair Lady at the TCM Movie DatabaseMy Fair Lady at AllRoviMy Fair Lady at Box Office MojoMy Fair Lady at Rotten TomatoesSophie's Choice is a 1982 American drama film that tells the story of a Polish immigrant, Sophie, and her tempestuous lover who share a boarding house with a young writer in Brooklyn. The film stars Meryl Streep, Kevin Kline, and Peter MacNicol. Alan J. Pakula directed the movie and wrote the script from a novel by William Styron, also called Sophie's Choice.Meryl Streep's performance was very favorably received, and it won her the Academy Award for Best Actress, and is considered among the best performances in the history of film.[citation needed] The film was nominated for Best Cinematography (Nstor Almendros), Costume Design (Albert Wolsky), Best Music (Marvin Hamlisch), and Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium (Alan J. Pakula).The studio behind the film was ITC Entertainment, the famous British company presided over (until late 1981) by Lord Grade, the television and film 'mogul'. Lord Grade was very influential in bringing the film to the 'big screen'.In 1947, the movie's narrator, Stingo (Peter MacNicol), relocates to Brooklyn in order to write a novel and is befriended by Sophie Zawistowski (Meryl Streep), a Polish immigrant, and her lover, Nathan Landau (Kevin Kline).One evening, Stingo learns from Sophie that she was married but her husband and her father were killed in a German work camp and that she was interned in the Auschwitz concentration camp.Nathan is constantly jealous, and when he is in one of his violent mood swings he convinces himself that Sophie is unfaithful to him and abuses and harasses her. There is a flashback showing Nathan rescuing Sophie from near death from anemia shortly after her immigration to the U.S.Sophie (a Polish Catholic) eventually reveals that her father was a Nazi sympathizer. Sophie had a lover, Jzef (Neddim Prohic), who lived with his half-sister, Wanda (Katharina Thalbach), a leader in the Resistance. Wanda tried to convince Sophie to translate some stolen Gestapo documents, but Sophie declined, fearing she might endanger her children. Two weeks later Jzef was murdered by the Gestapo, and Sophie was arrested and sent to Auschwitz with her children.Nathan tells Sophie and Stingo that the research he is doing at a pharmaceutical company is so groundbreaking that he will win the Nobel Prize.At a meeting with Nathan's physician brother, Stingo learns that Nathan is mentally ill (paranoid schizophrenic) and that all of the schools that Nathan had attended were "expensive funny farms." (He has a job in the library of a pharmaceutical firm, which his brother got for him, and only occasionally assists with research.)After Nathan discharges a firearm over the telephone in a violent rage, Sophie and Stingo flee to a hotel. She reveals to him the tragic choice she was forced to make at Auschwitz. Upon arrival, she was forced to choose which one of her two children would be gassed and which would proceed to the labor camp. To avoid having both children killed, she chose her son, Jan (Adrian Kaltika), to be sent to the children's camp, and her daughter, Eva (Jennifer Lawn), to be sent to her death in Crematorium Two.Sophie and Stingo make love, but while Stingo is sleeping, Sophie, tormented by her memory, returns to Nathan. Sophie and Nathan commit suicide by taking cyanide. Stingo recites the poem "Ample Make This Bed" by Emily Dickinsonthe American poet Sophie was fond of reading.Stingo moves away from Brooklyn to a small farm his father recently inherited in southern Virginia to finish writing his novel.William Styron wrote the novel with Ursula Andress in mind for the part of Sophie, but Meryl Streep was very determined to get the role. After she obtained a bootlegged copy of the script, she went after Alan J. Pakula and threw herself on the ground, begging him to give her the part.[1] Pakulas first choice was Liv Ullmann for her ability to project the foreignness that would add to her appeal in the eyes of an impressionable, romantic Southerner.Streep filmed the "choice" scene in one take. Being a mother herself, she found shooting the scene extremely painful and emotionally draining and refused to do it again.[citation needed] Streep's characterization was voted the third greatest movie performance of all time by Premiere Magazine.[2]Sophie's Choice won the Academy Award for Best Actress (Meryl Streep) and was nominated for Best Cinematography (Nstor Almendros), Costume Design (Albert Wolsky), Best Music (Marvin Hamlisch), and Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium (Alan J. Pakula). The film was also ranked #1 in the Roger Ebert's Top Ten List for 1982 and was listed on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition).Academy AwardsBAFTA AwardsGolden Globe AwardsWriters Guild of AmericaDecember 8, 1982(1982-12-08)1 Plot2 Cast

2.1 Casting notes

2.1 Casting notes3 Reception4 Awards and nominations5 See also6 References7 External links2.1 Casting notesMeryl Streep as Zofia "Sophie" ZawistowskaKevin Kline as Nathan LandauPeter MacNicol as StingoRita Karin as Yetta ZimmermanStephen D. Newman as Larry LandauJosh Mostel as Morris FinkMarcell Rosenblatt as Astrid WeinsteinMoishe Rosenfeld as Moishe RosenblumRobin Bartlett as Lillian GrossmanEugene Lipinski as Polish professorJohn Rothman as LibrarianNeddim Prohic as JzefKatharina Thalbach as WandaJennifer Lawn as Eva ZawistowskiAdrian Kalitka as Jan ZawistowskiJoseph Leon as Dr. BlackstockDavid Wohl as English teacherVida Jerman as female SS guardJosef Sommer as the Narrator (Stingo as an adult)Best Actress - Meryl Streep (won)Best Cinematography - Nestor Almendros (nominated)Best Costume Design - Albert Wolsky (nominated)Best Original Score - Marvin Hamlisch (nominated)Best Screenplay: Adapted - Pakula (nominated)Best Actress - Streep (nominated)Most Outstanding Newcomer to Film - Kevin Kline (nominated)Best Actress: Drama - Streep (won)Best Film: Drama (nominated)New Star of the Year in a Motion Picture: Male - Kline (nominated)Best Drama Adapted from Another Medium - Pakula (nominated)1982 in filmList of Holocaust filmsSophie's Choice at the Internet Movie DatabaseSophie's Choice at AllRoviSophie's Choice at Box Office MojoSophie's Choice at Rotten TomatoesA Place in the Sun is a 1951 American drama film based on the 1925 novel An American Tragedy by Theodore Dreiser and the play, also titled An American Tragedy. It tells the story of a working-class young man who is entangled with two women; one who works in his wealthy uncle's factory and the other a beautiful socialite. The novel had been filmed once before, as An American Tragedy, in 1931.A Place in the Sun was directed by George Stevens from a screenplay by Harry Brown and Michael Wilson, and stars Montgomery Clift, Elizabeth Taylor, Shelley Winters, Anne Revere, and Raymond Burr.[1][2]The film was a critical and commercial success, winning six Academy Awards and the first ever Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  Drama. In 1991, A Place in the Sun was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".George Eastman (Montgomery Clift), the poor nephew of rich industrialist Charles Eastman (Herbert Heyes), and no relation to the real-life George Eastman, takes a job in his uncle's factory. Despite George's family relationship to the owner, the rich Eastman family treats him as an outsider and gives him the humblest job available in the factory and no entry into their exclusive social circle. George, uncomplaining, hopes to impress his unclewhom he addresses as "Mr. Eastman"with his hard work and earn his way up. While working in the factory, George starts dating fellow factory worker Alice Tripp (Shelley Winters), in defiance of the workplace rules. Alice is a poor and inexperienced girl who is dazzled by George and slow to believe that his Eastman name brings him no advantages.While stepping out with Al, George meets "society girl" Angela Vickers, played by Elizabeth Taylor, and they quickly fall in love. Being Angela's escort thrusts George into the intoxicating and carefree lifestyle of high society that his rich Eastman kin had denied him. When Alice announces that she is pregnant and makes it clear that she expects George to marry her, he puts her off, spending more and more of his time with Angela and his new well-heeled friends. An attempt to procure an abortion for Alice fails, and she renews her insistence on marriage. George is invited to join Angela at the Vickers's holiday lake house and excuses himself to Alice, saying that the visit will advance his career and accrue to the benefit of the coming child.George and Angela spend time at secluded Loon Lake, and after hearing a story of a couple's supposed drowning there, with the man's body never being found, George hatches a plan to rid himself of Alice so that he can marry Angela.Meanwhile, Alice finds a picture in the newspaper of George, Angela, and their friends, and realizing that George lied to her about being forced to go to the lake, she meets George in the nearby town and threatens to expose everything to his society friends if he doesn't marry her. They quickly drive to City Hall to elope but they find it closed for Labor Day, and George suggests spending the day at the nearby lake; Alice unsuspectingly agrees.When they get to the lake, George acts visibly nervous when he rents a boat from a man who seems to deduce that George gave him a false name; the man's suspicions are aroused more when George asks him whether any other boaters are on the lake (none are). While they are out on the lake, Alice confesses her dreams about their happy future together with their child. As George apparently takes pity on her and, judging from his attitude, decides not to carry out his murderous plan, Alice tries to stand up in the boat, causing it to capsize, and Alice drowns.George escapes, swims to shore, and eventually drives back up to the Vickers's lodge, where he tries to relax but is increasingly tense. He says nothing to anyone about having been on the lake or about what happened there. Meanwhile, Alice's body is discovered and her death is treated as a murder investigation almost from the first moment, while an abundant amount of evidence and witness reports stack up against George. Just as Angela's father approves Angela's marriage to him, George is arrested and charged with Alice's murder. Though the audience knows that the planned murder in fact turned into an accidental drowning, George's furtive actions before and after Alice's death condemn him. His denials are futile, and he is found guilty of murder and sentenced to death in the electric chair. Near the end, he confesses in his cell that he deserves to die because he could have saved Alice, but chose not to.The film earned an estimated $3.5 million at the US and Canadian box office in 1951.[3]August 14, 1951(1951-08-14)1 Plot summary2 Cast3 Reception4 Awards and nominations

4.1 Academy Awards
4.2 Other honors

4.1 Academy Awards4.2 Other honors5 References6 External links4.1 Academy Awards4.2 Other honorsMontgomery Clift as George EastmanElizabeth Taylor as Angela VickersShelley Winters as Alice TrippAnne Revere as Hannah EastmanKeefe Brasselle as Earl EastmanFred Clark as Bellows, defense attorneyRaymond Burr as Dist. Atty. R. Frank MarloweHerbert Heyes as Charles EastmanShepperd Strudwick as Anthony 'Tony' VickersFrieda Inescort as Mrs. Ann VickersKathryn Givney as Louise EastmanWalter Sande as Art Jansen, George's AttorneyTed de Corsia as Judge R.S. OldendorffJohn Ridgely as CoronerLois Chartrand as MarshaBest Cinematography, Black-and-White (William C. Mellor)Best Costume Design, Black-and-White (Edith Head)Best Director (George Stevens)Best Film Editing (William Hornbeck)Best Original Score (Franz Waxman)Best Writing, Screenplay (Michael Wilson and Harry Brown)Best Actor in a Leading Role (Montgomery Clift)Best Actress in a Leading Role (Shelley Winters)Best PictureAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - #92AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions - #53AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"I love you. I've loved you since the first moment I saw you. I guess maybe Ive even loved you before I saw you." - Nominated[4]

"I love you. I've loved you since the first moment I saw you. I guess maybe Ive even loved you before I saw you." - Nominated[4]AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores - Nominated[5]AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - Nominated[6]"I love you. I've loved you since the first moment I saw you. I guess maybe Ive even loved you before I saw you." - Nominated[4]Best Picture (Drama)Best DirectorIn competition (1951)[7]A Place in the Sun at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Apartment is a 1960 American comedy-drama film produced and directed by Billy Wilder, which stars Jack Lemmon, Shirley MacLaine, and Fred MacMurray. It was Wilder's follow-up to Some Like It Hot and, like its predecessor, was a commercial and critical hit, grossing $25 million at the box office. The film was nominated for ten Academy Awards, and won five, including Best Picture. The film was the basis of the 1968 Broadway musical Promises, Promises, featuring book by Neil Simon, music by Burt Bacharach, and lyrics by Hal David.C. C. Baxter (Jack Lemmon) is a lonely office drone for a national insurance corporation in a high-rise building in New York City. In order to climb the corporate ladder, Baxter allows four company managers, on different evenings of the week, to take turns borrowing his Upper West Side apartment for their various extramarital liaisons that are so noisy that his neighours assume he is bringing home different women every night.The four managers write glowing reports about Baxter and the personnel director, Jeffery Sheldrake (Fred MacMurray), promotes him to his personal staff, but not before convincing Baxter to give him exclusive privilege to the apartment. He insists on using it that very night and, as compensation for such short notice, gives Baxter two company-sponsored tickets to the then hit (and always sold-out) Broadway musical The Music Man.After work, Baxter catches Fran Kubelik (Shirley MacLaine), an elevator operator he has had his eye on. They agree to meet up at the theater after she has a drink with a former fling. While Baxter waits, Miss Kubelik meets with Mr. Sheldrake, who convinces her that he is divorcing his wife for her. He takes her to Baxter's apartment while Baxter waits for her at the movie theater, never going in.Several weeks later, at the Company's raucous Christmas Eve office party, Baxter inadvertently discovers the relationship between Sheldrake and Miss Kubelik, though he conceals this realization. Back at his apartment, Miss Kubelik reveals to Sheldrake that she's learned from his secretary (Edie Adams) that she is merely the latest female employee to be Sheldrake's mistress, the secretary herself having filled that role several years earlier. While she is upset with herself for believing his lies, Sheldrake maintains that he genuinely loves her and leaves to return to his suburban family.Meanwhile, a holiday-depressed Baxter picks up a woman in a local bar and, upon their arrival at his apartment, is shocked to find Miss Kubelik in his bed, fully clothed and unconscious from an intentional overdose of Baxter's sleeping pills. He sends his bar pickup home and enlists the help of his neighbor, Dr. Dreyfus, in reviving Miss Kubelik without notifying the authorities. She spends several days recuperating at his apartment while Baxter tries to entertain and distract her from any further suicidal thoughts, talking her into playing numerous hands of gin rummy, though she is largely uninterested.Since she has been missing, Miss kubelik's brother-in-law comes to the office looking for her. The four executives direct him to Baxter's apartment, assuming that Baxter, who still denies them the use of his apartment, and Miss Kubelik are having an affair. The brother-in-law assumes the worst of Baxter and punches him twice after confronting the pair in Baxter's apartment.Sheldrake fires his secretary for revealing his history of womanizing. She retaliates by telling his wife about his infidelities, leading to the breakup of his marriage. Sheldrake, having moved into a room at his athletic club, figures he can string Miss Kubelik along while he enjoys his newfound bachelorhood. When he requests access to Baxter's apartment on New Year's Eve, Baxter refuses and quits the firm in the process. When Miss Kubelik hears of this from Sheldrake, she realizes that Baxter is the man who truly loves her, and runs to his apartment. She arrives at his apartment alone and she insists on resuming their earlier game of gin rummy. When he declares his love for her, her reply is the now-famous final line of the film: "Shut up and deal".Immediately following the success of Some Like It Hot, Billy Wilder and I.A.L. Diamond wished to make another film with Jack Lemmon. Wilder had originally planned to cast Paul Douglas as Jeff Sheldrake; however, after he died unexpectedly, Fred MacMurray was cast.The initial concept for the film came from Brief Encounter by Nol Coward, in which Celia Johnson has an affair with Trevor Howard in his friend's apartment. However, due to the Hays Production Code, Wilder was unable to make a film about adultery in the 1940s. Wilder and Diamond also based the film partially on a Hollywood scandal in which high-powered agent Jennings Lang was shot by producer Walter Wanger for having an affair with Wanger's wife, actress Joan Bennett. During the affair, Lang used a low-level employee's apartment.[2] Another element of the plot was based on the experience of one of Diamond's friends who returned home after breaking up with his girlfriend to find that she had committed suicide in his bed.Although Wilder generally required his actors to adhere exactly to the script, he allowed Jack Lemmon to improvise in two scenes: in one scene he squirted a bottle of nose drops across the room and in another he sang while making a meal of spaghetti (which he strains through the grid of a tennis racket). In another scene where Lemmon was supposed to mime being punched, he failed to move correctly and was accidentally knocked down. Wilder chose to use the shot of the genuine punch in the film. He also caught a cold when one scene on a park bench was filmed in sub-zero weather.Art director Alexandre Trauner used forced perspective to create the set of a large insurance company office. The set appeared to be a very long room full of desks and workers; however, successively smaller people and desks were placed to the back of the room ending up with children. He designed the set of Baxter's apartment to appear smaller and shabbier than the spacious apartments that usually appeared in films of the day. He used items from thrift stores and even some of Wilder's own furniture for the set.[3]The "Theme from the Apartment" was written by Charles Williams and was originally titled "Jealous Lover", which was first heard in the 1949 film The Romantic Age.[4][5][6]At the time of release, the film was a critical and commercial success, making $25 million at the box office and receiving a range of positive reviews. The New York Times film critic Bosley Crowther enjoyed the film, calling it, "A gleeful, tender, and even sentimental film." Chicago Sun-Times film critic Roger Ebert and ReelViews film critic James Berardinelli both praised the film, giving it four stars out of four, with Ebert adding it to his "Great Movies" list. The film has a 93% fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 54 reviews.However, there was some criticism. Due to its themes of infidelity and adultery, the film was controversial for its time. It initially received some negative reviews for its content. Film critic Hollis Alpert of the Saturday Review called it "a dirty fairy tale".[7] According to Fred MacMurray, after the film's release he was accosted by a strange woman in the street who berated him for making a "dirty filthy movie" and hit him with her purse.[3]The Apartment received 10 Academy Award nominations and won 5 Academy Awards.[8][9]Although Jack Lemmon did not win, at the 2000 Awards, Kevin Spacey dedicated his Oscar for American Beauty to Lemmon's performance. According to the behind-the-scenes feature on the American Beauty DVD, the film's director, Sam Mendes, had watched The Apartment (among other classic American films) as inspiration in preparation for shooting his film.The Apartment was the last film shot entirely in black-and-white to win the Academy Award for Best Picture until Schindler's List in 1993.The Apartment also won the BAFTA Award for Best Film from any Source and Lemmon and MacLaine both won a BAFTA and a Golden Globe each for their performances. The film appears at #93 on the influential American Film Institute list of Top 100 Films, as well as at #20 on their list of 100 Laughs and at #62 on their 100 Passions list. In 2007, the film rose on the AFI's Top 100 list to #80. In 1994, The Apartment was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. In 2002, a poll of film directors conducted by Sight and Sound magazine listed the film as the 14th greatest film of all time (tied with La Dolce Vita).[10] In 2006, Premiere voted this film as one of "The 50 Greatest Comedies Of All Time".Billy WilderI.A.L. DiamondJack LemmonShirley MacLaineFred MacMurrayJune 15, 1960(1960-06-15)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception

4.1 33rd Academy Awards (Oscars) 1960
4.2 Other awards and honors

4.1 33rd Academy Awards (Oscars) 19604.2 Other awards and honors5 See also6 References7 External links4.1 33rd Academy Awards (Oscars) 19604.2 Other awards and honorsJack Lemmon as C.C. "Buddy Boy" BaxterShirley MacLaine as Fran KubelikFred MacMurray as Jeff D. SheldrakeRay Walston as Joe DobischJack Kruschen as Dr. DreyfussDavid Lewis as Al KirkebyHope Holiday as Mrs. Margie MacDougallJoan Shawlee as SylviaNaomi Stevens as Mrs. Mildred DreyfussJohnny Seven as Karl MatuschkaJoyce Jameson as the blonde in the barHal Smith as Santa Claus in the barWillard Waterman as Mr. VanderhoffDavid White as Mr. EichelbergerEdie Adams as Miss OlsenLife in a... MetroPromises, Promises - a Broadway musical based on the film, with a book by Neil Simon, music by Burt Bacharach and lyrics by Hal David.The Apartment at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Apartment at the TCM Movie DatabaseGoodfellas (stylized as GoodFellas) is a 1990 American crime film directed by Martin Scorsese. It is a film adaptation of the 1986 non-fiction book Wiseguy by Nicholas Pileggi, who co-wrote the screenplay with Scorsese. The film follows the rise and fall of Lucchese crime family associates Henry Hill and his friends over a period from 1955 to 1980.Scorsese originally intended to direct Goodfellas before The Last Temptation of Christ, but when funds materialized to make Last Temptation, he postponed what was then known as Wise Guy. The title of Pileggi's book had already been used for a TV series and for Brian De Palma's 1986 comedy Wise Guys, so Pileggi and Scorsese changed the name of their film to Goodfellas. To prepare for their roles in the film, Robert De Niro, Joe Pesci, and Ray Liotta often spoke with Pileggi, who shared research material left over from writing the book. According to Pesci, improvisation and ad-libbing came out of rehearsals where Scorsese gave the actors freedom to do whatever they wanted. The director made transcripts of these sessions, took the lines he liked best, and put them into a revised script the cast worked from during principal photography.Goodfellas performed well at the box office, grossing $46.8 million domestically, well above its $25 million budget. It also received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics. The film was nominated for six Academy Awards, including Best Picture and Best Director, and won one for Pesci in the Best Actor in a Supporting Role category. Scorsese's film won five awards from the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, including Best Film, and Best Director. The film was named Best Film of the year by various film critics groups. Goodfellas is often considered one of the greatest films ever, both in the crime genre and in general, and was deemed "culturally significant" and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress. Scorsese followed this film up with two more films about organized crime: 1995's Casino and 2006's The Departed.Henry Hill (Liotta) admits, "As far back as I can remember, I always wanted to be a gangster," referring to his idolizing the Lucchese crime family gangsters in his blue-collar, predominantly Italian-American neighborhood in East New York, Brooklyn in 1955. Wanting to be part of something significant, Henry quits school and goes to work for them. His Irish-American father tries to stop Henry after learning of his truancy, but the gangsters threaten the local postal carrier with dire consequences should he deliver any more letters from the school to Henry's house. Henry is able to make a living for himself, and learns the two most important lessons in life: "Never rat on your friends, and always keep your mouth shut," the advice given to him after being acquitted of criminal charges early in his career.Henry is taken under the wing of the local mob capo, Paul "Paulie" Cicero (Sorvino) and his associates, Jimmy "The Gent" Conway (De Niro), who loves hijacking trucks, and Tommy DeVito (Pesci), an aggressive armed robber with a hair-trigger temper. In late 1967 they commit the Air France Robbery, marking Henry's debut into the big time. Enjoying the perks of their criminal life, they spend most of their nights at the Copacabana with countless women. Henry meets and later marries Karen (Bracco), a Jewish girl from the Five Towns. Karen is initially troubled by Henry's criminal activities, but is soon seduced by his glamorous lifestyle. When a neighbor assaults her for refusing his advances, Henry pistol-whips him in front of her. She feels aroused by the act, especially when Henry gives her the gun and tells her to hide it.On June 11, 1970, Tommy (with Jimmy's help) brutally beats Billy Batts (Vincent), a mobster with the Gambino crime family, for insulting him about being a shoeshine boy in his younger days. However, Batts was a made man, meaning that he could not be touched without the consent of his Gambino family bosses. Realizing that this was an offense that could get them all killed, Jimmy, Henry, and Tommy need to cover up the murder. They transport the body in the trunk of Henry's car and bury it upstate. Six months later Jimmy learns that the burial site will be developed, forcing them to exhume the decomposing corpse and move it.Henry begins to see a mistress named Janice Rossi (Mastrogiacomo), setting her up in an apartment. When Karen finds out, she goes to Janice's apartment building to confront her, but is not let in past the front door. She then confronts Henry, points a revolver at his face, and threatens to kill both of them, demanding to know if he loves Janice. Karen cannot bring herself to kill him and an enraged Henry threatens Karen with the gun and says he has bigger concerns, like being murdered on the streets. Henry goes to live in the apartment with Janice. Paulie soon directs him to return to Karen after completing a job for him; Henry and Jimmy are sent to collect from an indebted gambler in Florida, which they succeed at after beating him. However most of the crew are arrested after being turned in by the gambler's sister, a typist for the FBI.In prison, Henry sells drugs to support his family on the outside. Soon after he is released in 1978, the crew commits the Lufthansa heist at John F. Kennedy International Airport. Despite Paulie's warning to stop, Henry further establishes himself in the drug trade, convincing Tommy and Jimmy to join him. Jimmy has the other participants in the Lufthansa robbery killed after they ignore his command to not immediately buy expensive things with their share of the stolen money. Then Tommy is killed for the murder of Billy Batts, having been fooled into thinking that he is going to be made.By 1980, Henry is a nervous wreck from cocaine use and insomnia, as he tries to organize a drug deal with his associates in Pittsburgh. However, he is caught by narcotics agents and sent to jail. On his release, Karen tells him that she flushed $60,000 worth of cocaine down the toilet to prevent the FBI agents from finding it during their raid, leaving Henry and his family virtually penniless. Feeling Henry betrayed him by dealing drugs, Paulie gives Henry $3,200 and ends his association with him. Henry decides to enroll in the Witness Protection Program after realizing that Jimmy intends to have him killed. Forced out of his gangster life, he now has to face living in the real world: "I'm an average nobody. I get to live the rest of my life like a schnook."Titles explain that Henry was subsequently arrested on drug charges in Seattle, Washington but has been clean since 1987. Paul Cicero died in Fort Worth Federal Prison of respiratory illness in 1988 at 73. Jimmy, as of 1990, was serving a 20-year-to-life sentence in a New York State prison.Goodfellas is based on New York crime reporter Nicholas Pileggi's book Wiseguy. Martin Scorsese never intended to make another mob film until he read a review of the book which inspired him to read it[2] while working on the set of Color of Money in 1986.[3] He had always been fascinated by the Mob lifestyle and was drawn to Pileggi's book because it was the most honest portrayal of gangsters he had ever read.[4] After he read Pileggi's book, the filmmaker knew what approach he wanted to take: "To begin Goodfellas like a gunshot and have it get faster from there, almost like a two-and-a-half-hour trailer. I think it's the only way you can really sense the exhilaration of the lifestyle, and to get a sense of why a lot of people are attracted to it."[5] According to Pileggi, Scorsese cold-called the writer and told him, "I've been waiting for this book my entire life." To which Pileggi replied "I've been waiting for this phone call my entire life".[6]Scorsese originally intended to direct the film before The Last Temptation of Christ, but when funds materialized to make Last Temptation, he decided to postpone Wise Guy. He was drawn to the documentary aspects of Pileggi's book. "The book Wise Guys gives you a sense of the day-to-day life, the tedium - how they work, how they take over certain nightclubs, and for what reasons. It shows how it's done".[6] He saw Goodfellas as the third film in an unplanned trilogy of films that examined the lives of Italian-Americans "from slightly different angles".[7] He has often described the film as "a mob home movie" that is about money because "that's what they're really in business for".[4]Scorsese and Pileggi collaborated on the screenplay and over the course of the 12 drafts it took to reach the ideal script, the reporter realized that "the visual styling had to be completely redone So we decided to share credit".[6][8] They decided which sections of the book they liked and put them together like building blocks.[1] Scorsese persuaded Pileggi that they did not need to follow a traditional narrative structure. The director wanted to take the gangster film and deal with it episode by episode but start in the middle and move backwards and forwards. Scorsese would compact scenes and realized that if they were kept short, "the impact after about an hour and a half would be terrific".[1] He wanted to do the voiceover like the opening of Jules and Jim and use "all the basic tricks of the New Wave from around 1961".[1] Several of the names of the characters were also changed such as Tommy "Two Gunn" DeSimone becoming Tommy DeVito; Paul Vario becoming Paulie Cicero and Jimmy "The Gent" Burke becoming Jimmy Conway.[8] Since the title of Pileggi's book had already been used for a TV series and for Brian De Palma's 1986 comedy Wise Guys, Pileggi and Scorsese decided to change the name of their film to Goodfellas.[1]Once Robert De Niro agreed to play Conway, Scorsese was able to secure the money needed to make the film.[3] The director cast Ray Liotta after De Niro saw him in Jonathan Demme's Something Wild and Scorsese was surprised by "his explosive energy" in that film.[7] The actor had read Pileggi's book when it came out and was fascinated by it. A couple of years afterwards, his agent told him that Scorsese was going to direct a film version. In 1988, Liotta met the director over a period of a couple of months and auditioned for the film.[4] The actor campaigned aggressively for a role in the film but the studio wanted a well-known actor. "I think they would've rather had Eddie Murphy than me", the actor remembers.[9]To prepare for the role, De Niro consulted with Pileggi who had research material that had been discarded while writing the book.[10] De Niro often called Hill several times a day to ask how Burke walked, held his cigarette, and so on.[11][12] Driving to and from the set, Liotta listened to FBI audio cassette tapes of Hill, so he could practice speaking like his real-life counterpart.[12] To research her role, Lorraine Bracco tried to get close to a mob wife but was unable to because they exist in a very tight-knit community. She decided not to meet the real Karen because she "thought it would be better if the creation came from me. I used her life with her parents as an emotional guideline for the role".[13] Paul Sorvino had no problem finding the voice and walk of his character but found it challenging finding "that kernel of coldness and absolute hardness that is antithetical to my nature except when my family is threatened".[14]Two weeks in advance of the filming, the real Henry Hill was paid $480,000.[8] The film was shot on location in Queens, New York, New Jersey, and parts of Long Island during the spring and summer of 1989, with a budget of $25 million.[8] Scorsese broke the film down into sequences and storyboarded everything because of the complicated style throughout. According to the filmmaker, he "wanted lots of movement and I wanted it to be throughout the whole picture, and I wanted the style to kind of break down by the end, so that by [Henry's] last day as a wiseguy, it's as if the whole picture would be out of control, give the impression he's just going to spin off the edge and fly out."[2] He claims that the film's style comes from the first two or three minutes of Jules and Jim: extensive narration, quick edits, freeze frames, and multiple locale switches.[5] It was this reckless attitude towards convention that mirrored the attitude of many of the gangsters in the film. Scorsese remarked, "So if you do the movie, you say, 'I don't care if there's too much narration. Too many quick cuts?  That's too bad.' It's that kind of really punk attitude we're trying to show".[5] He adopted a frenetic style in order to almost overwhelm the audience with images and information.[1] He also put a lot of detail in every frame because the gangster life is so rich. The use of freeze frames was done because Scorsese wanted images that would stop "because a point was being reached" in Henry's life.[1]Joe Pesci did not judge his character but found the scene where he kills Spider for talking back to his character hard to do because he had trouble justifying the action until he forced himself to feel the way Tommy did.[4] Lorraine Bracco found the shoot to be an emotionally difficult one because it was such a male-dominated cast and realized that if she did not make her "work important, it would probably end up on the cutting room floor".[4] When it came to the relationship between Henry and Karen, Bracco saw no difference between an abused wife and her character.[4]According to Pesci, improvisation and ad-libbing came out of rehearsals where Scorsese let the actors do whatever they wanted. He made transcripts of these sessions, took the lines that the actors came up with that he liked best, and put them into a revised script that the cast worked from during principal photography.[10] For example, the scene where Tommy tells a story and Henry is responding to him  the "what's so funny about me" scene  is based on an actual event that happened to Pesci. It was worked on in rehearsals where he and Liotta improvised and Scorsese recorded 4-5 takes, rewrote their dialogue and inserted it into the script.[15] The cast did not meet Henry Hill during the film's shoot until a few weeks before it premiered. Liotta met him in an undisclosed city. Hill had seen the film and told the actor that he loved it.[4]The long tracking shot through the Copacabana nightclub came about because of a practical problem: the filmmakers could not get permission to go in the short way and this forced them to go round the back.[1] Scorsese decided to film the sequence in one unbroken shot in order to symbolize that Henry's entire life was ahead of him, commenting, "It's his seduction of her [Karen] and it's also the lifestyle seducing him."[1] This sequence was shot eight times.[15]Henry's last day as a wiseguy was the hardest part of the film for Scorsese to shoot because he wanted to properly show Henry's state of anxiety, paranoia and racing thoughts caused by cocaine and amphetamines intoxication, which is difficult for an actor (who had never been under their influence) to accurately portray.[1] Scorsese explains to movie critic Mark Cousins in an interview the reason for the Joe Pesci shooting at the screen shot at the end of the film, "well that's a reference right to the end of The Great Train Robbery, thats the way that ends, that film, and basically the plot of this picture is very similar to The Great Train Robbery. It hasn't changed, 90 years later, it's the same story, the gun shots will always be there, he's always going to look behind his back, he's gotta have eyes behind his back, because they're gonna get him someday." The director ended the film with Henry regretting that he is no longer a wiseguy and Scorsese said, "I think the audience should get angry at him and I would hope they do  and maybe with the system which allows this."[1]Scorsese wanted to depict the film's violence realistically, "cold, unfeeling and horrible. Almost incidental."[3] However, he had to remove ten frames of blood in order to ensure an R rating from the MPAA.[7] With a budget of $25 million, Goodfellas was Scorsese's most expensive film to date but still only a medium budget by Hollywood standards. It was also the first time he was obliged by Warner Bros. to preview the film. It was shown twice in California and a lot of audiences were "agitated" by Henry's last day as a wise guy sequence and Scorsese argued that that was the point of the scene.[1] Scorsese and the film's editor, Thelma Schoonmaker, made this sequence faster with more jump cuts to convey Henry's drug-addled point of view. In the first test screening there were 40 walkouts in the first ten minutes.[15] One of the favorite scenes for test audiences was the one where Tommy tells the story and Henry is responding to himthe "what's so funny about me" scene.[1]Scorsese chose the songs for the soundtrack using only those that commented on the scene or the characters "in an oblique way".[7] The only rule he adhered to with the soundtrack was to only use music that could have been heard at that time. For example, if a scene took place in 1973, he could use any song that was current or older. According to Scorsese, a lot of non-dialogue scenes were shot to playback. For example, he had "Layla" playing on the set while shooting the scene where the dead bodies are discovered in the car, dumpster, and the meat-truck. Sometimes, the lyrics of songs were put between lines of dialogue to comment on the action.[1] Some of the music Scorsese had written into the script while other songs he discovered during the editing phase.[15]Goodfellas had its world premiere at the 1990 Venice Film Festival where Scorsese received the Silver Lion award for Best Director.[16] It was given a wide release in North America on September 21, 1990 in 1,070 theaters with an opening weekend gross of US$6.3 million. It went on to make $46.8 million domestically, well above its $25 million budget.[17]The film was released to critical acclaim and currently has a 97% rating at Rotten Tomatoes and a 89 metascore at Metacritic.[18] In his review for the Chicago Sun-Times, Roger Ebert wrote, "No finer film has ever been made about organized crime - not even The Godfather."[19] In his review for the Chicago Tribune, Gene Siskel wrote, "All of the performances are first-rate; Pesci stands out, though, with his seemingly unscripted manner. GoodFellas is easily one of the year's best films."[20] In his review for The New York Times, Vincent Canby wrote, "More than any earlier Scorsese film, Goodfellas is memorable for the ensemble nature of the performances The movie has been beautifully cast from the leading roles to the bits. There is flash also in some of Mr. Scorsese's directorial choices, including freeze frames, fast-cutting and the occasional long tracking shot. None of it is superfluous".[21] USA Today gave the film four out of four stars and called it, "great cinema  and also a whopping good time".[5] David Ansen, in his review for Newsweek magazine, wrote "Every crisp minute of this long, teeming movie vibrates with outlaw energy". Rex Reed said "Big, Rich, Powerful and Explosive. One of Scorsese's best films! Goodfellas is great entertainment."[22] In his review for Time, Richard Corliss wrote, "So it is Scorsese's triumph that GoodFellas offers the fastest, sharpest 2-hr. ride in recent film history".[23]The film is ranked #1 of the best of 1990 by Roger Ebert,[24] Gene Siskel,[24] and Peter Travers.[25] It is 38th on James Berardinelli's Top 100 Films.[26]Goodfellas is #94 on the American Film Institute's "100 Years, 100 Movies" list and moved up to #92 on its AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) from 2007. In June 2008, the AFI put Goodfellas at #2 on their AFI's 10 Top 10the best ten films in ten "classic" American film genresafter polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. Goodfellas was acknowledged as the second best in the gangster film genre (after The Godfather).[29] In 2000, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.Roger Ebert, named Goodfellas the "best mob movie ever" and placed it among the best films of the 1990s.[30] In December 2002, a UK film critics poll in Sight and Sound ranked the film #4 on their list of the 10 Best Films of the Last 25 Years.[31] Time included Goodfellas in their list of Time's All-TIME 100 Movies.[32] Channel 4 placed Goodfellas at #10 in their 2002 poll The 100 Greatest Films. Empire listed Goodfellas at #6 on their "500 Greatest Movies Of All Time".[33] Total Film voted Goodfellas #1 as the greatest film of all time.[34]Premiere listed Joe Pesci's Tommy DeVito as #96 on its list of "The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time," calling him "perhaps the single most irredeemable character ever put on film."[35] Empire ranked Tommy DeVito #59 in their "The 100 Greatest Movie Characters" poll.[36]Goodfellas inspired director David Chase to make the HBO television series The Sopranos. Chase said "Goodfellas is the Koran for me." He also told Peter Bogdanovich: "Goodfellas is a very important movie to me and Goodfellas really plowed that...I found that movie very funny and brutal and it felt very real. And yet that was the first mob movie that Scorsese ever dealt with a mob crew....as opposed to say The Godfather...which there's something operatic about it, classical, even the clothing and the cars. You know I mean I always think about Goodfellas when they go to their mother's house that night when they're eating, you know when she brings out her painting, that stuff is great. I mean The Sopranos learned a lot from that."[37]July 24, 2010 marked the twentieth anniversary of the film's release. This milestone was celebrated with Henry Hill's hosting a private screening for a select group of invitees at the Museum of the American Gangster, in New York City.[38]In January 2012, it was announced that the AMC Network has put in development a television series version of the movie. Pileggi is on board to co-write the adaptation with television writer-producer Jorge Zamacona. The two will executive produce with the films producer Irwin Winkler and his son, David.[39]American Film Institute ListsSeptember 19, 1990(1990-09-19)1 Plot2 Cast3 Development

3.1 Screenplay
3.2 Casting
3.3 Principal photography
3.4 Post-production

3.1 Screenplay3.2 Casting3.3 Principal photography3.4 Post-production4 Soundtrack5 Release and reception

5.1 Distribution
5.2 Reviews
5.3 Lists
5.4 Awards
5.5 Legacy

5.1 Distribution5.2 Reviews5.3 Lists5.4 Awards5.5 Legacy6 References7 Bibliography8 External links3.1 Screenplay3.2 Casting3.3 Principal photography3.4 Post-production5.1 Distribution5.2 Reviews5.3 Lists5.4 Awards5.5 LegacyRay Liotta as Henry HillRobert De Niro as Jimmy ConwayJoe Pesci as Tommy DeVitoLorraine Bracco as Karen HillPaul Sorvino as Paul CiceroFrank Sivero as Frankie CarboneFrank Vincent as Billy BattsTony Darrow as Sonny BunzMike Starr as FrenchyChuck Low as Morrie KesslerFrank DiLeo as Tuddy CiceroJohnny Williams as Johnny RoastbeefSamuel L. Jackson as Parnell "Stacks" EdwardsFrank Adonis as Anthony StabileCatherine Scorsese as Tommy DeVito's MotherGina Mastrogiacomo as Janice RossiDebi Mazar as SandyMargo Winkler as Belle KesslerWelker White as Lois ByrdJulie Garfield as Mickey ConwayPaul Herman as DealerDetective Ed Deacy as himselfChristopher Serrone as Henry Hill (young)Charles Scorsese as VinnieMichael Vivalo as Nicky EyesMichael Imperioli as "Spider"Tony Sirico as Tony StacksFrank Pellegrino as Johnny DioTony Ellis as Bridal Shop OwnerElizabeth Whitcraft as Tommy's girlfriendIlleana Douglas as Tommy's other girlfriendAnthony Powers as Jimmy Two-TimesAssistant U.S. Attorney Ed McDonald as himselfTony Lip as Frankie The WopJoseph Bono as Mikey FranzeseKevin Corrigan as Michael HillAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #94AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Tommy DeVito - Nominated Villain

Tommy DeVito - Nominated VillainAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Funny like I'm a clown? I amuse you?" - Nominated

"Funny like I'm a clown? I amuse you?" - NominatedAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #92AFI's 10 Top 10 - #2 Gangster filmTommy DeVito - Nominated Villain"Funny like I'm a clown? I amuse you?" - NominatedMartin Scorsese: A Journey, by Mary Pat Kelly (2003, Thunder Mouth Press), ISBN 978-1-56025-470-6.Scorsese on Scorsese, by David Thompson and Ian Christie (2004, Faber and Faber), ISBN 978-0-571-22002-1.Goodfellas, by Nicholas Pileggi and Martin Scorsese (1990, Faber and Faber), ISBN 978-0-571-16265-9.Wiseguy, by Nicholas Pileggi (1990, Rei Mti), ISBN 978-0-671-72322-4.Goodfellas at the Internet Movie DatabaseGoodfellas at the TCM Movie DatabaseGoodfellas at AllRoviGoodfellas at Rotten TomatoesGoodfellas at MetacriticGoodfellas at Box Office MojoReel Faces: Fact vs. FictionGQ magazine's oral history retrospective articlePulp Fiction is a 1994 American crime film directed by Quentin Tarantino, who co-wrote its screenplay with Roger Avary. The film is known for its rich, eclectic dialogue, ironic mix of humor and violence, nonlinear storyline, and host of cinematic allusions and pop culture references. The film was nominated for seven Oscars, including Best Picture; Tarantino and Avary won for Best Original Screenplay. It was also awarded the Palme d'Or at the 1994 Cannes Film Festival. A major critical and commercial success, it revitalized the career of its leading man, John Travolta, who received an Academy Award nomination, as did costars Samuel L. Jackson and Uma Thurman.Directed in a highly stylized manner, Pulp Fiction connects the intersecting storylines of Los Angeles mobsters, fringe players, small-time criminals, and a mysterious briefcase. Considerable screen time is devoted to conversations and monologues that reveal the characters' senses of humor and perspectives on life. The film's title refers to the pulp magazines and hardboiled crime novels popular during the mid-20th century, known for their graphic violence and punchy dialogue. Pulp Fiction is self-referential from its opening moments, beginning with a title card that gives two dictionary definitions of "pulp". The plot, as in many of Tarantino's other works, is presented out of chronological sequence.The picture's self-reflexivity, unconventional structure, and extensive use of homage and pastiche have led critics to describe it as a prime example of postmodern film. Considered by some critics a black comedy,[4] the film is also frequently labeled a "neo-noir".[5] Critic Geoffrey O'Brien argues otherwise: "The old-time noir passions, the brooding melancholy and operatic death scenes, would be altogether out of place in the crisp and brightly lit wonderland that Tarantino conjures up. [It is] neither neo-noir nor a parody of noir".[6] Similarly, Nicholas Christopher calls it "more gangland camp than neo-noir",[7] and Foster Hirsch suggests that its "trippy fantasy landscape" characterizes it more definitively than any genre label.[8] Pulp Fiction is viewed as the inspiration for many later movies that adopted various elements of its style. The nature of its development, marketing, and distribution and its consequent profitability had a sweeping effect on the field of independent cinema (although it is not an independent film itself). Considered a cultural watershed, Pulp Fiction's influence has been felt in several other media, and it is widely regarded as one of the greatest films of all time.In keeping with writer-director Quentin Tarantino's trademark of nonlinear storytelling, the narrative is presented out of sequence. Pulp Fiction is structured around three distinct but interrelated storylinesin Tarantino's conception, mob hitman Vincent Vega is the lead of the first story, prizefighter Butch Coolidge is the lead of the second, and Vincent's fellow contract killer, Jules Winnfield, is the lead of the third.[9] Although each storyline focuses on a different series of incidents, they connect and intersect in various ways. The film starts out with a diner hold-up staged by "Pumpkin" and "Honey Bunny", then picks up the stories of Vincent, Jules, Butch, and several other important characters, including mob kingpin Marsellus Wallace, his wife, Mia, and underworld problem-solver Winston Wolf. It finally returns to where it began, in the diner: Vincent and Jules, who have stopped in for a bite, find themselves embroiled in the hold-up. There are a total of seven narrative sequencesthe three primary storylines are preceded by identifying intertitles on a black screen:If the seven sequences were ordered chronologically, they would run: 4a, 2, 6, 1, 7, 3, 4b, 5. Sequences 1 and 7 partially overlap and are presented from different points of view; the same is true of sequences 2 and 6. In Philip Parker's description, the structural form is "an episodic narrative with circular events adding a beginning and end and allowing references to elements of each separate episode to be made throughout the narrative."[10] Other analysts describe the structure simply as a "circular narrative".[11]"Pumpkin" (Tim Roth) and "Honey Bunny" (Amanda Plummer) are having breakfast in a diner. They decide to rob it after realizing they could make money off the customers as well as the business, as they did during their previous heist. Moments after they initiate the hold-up, the scene breaks off and the title credits roll.As Jules Winnfield (Samuel L. Jackson) drives, Vincent Vega (John Travolta) talks about his experiences in Europe, from where he has just returned: the hash bars in Amsterdam, the French McDonald's and its "Royale with Cheese". The pairboth wearing dress suitsare on their way to retrieve a briefcase from Brett (Frank Whaley), who has transgressed against their boss, gangster Marsellus Wallace. Jules tells Vincent that Marsellus had someone thrown off a fourth-floor balcony for giving his wife a foot massage. Vincent says that Marsellus has asked him to escort his wife while Marsellus is out of town. They conclude their banter and "get into character", which soon involves executing Brett in dramatic fashion after Jules recites a baleful "biblical" pronouncement.In a virtually empty cocktail lounge, aging prizefighter Butch Coolidge (Bruce Willis) accepts a large sum of money from mobster Marsellus Wallace (Ving Rhames), agreeing to take a dive in his upcoming match. Vincent and Julesnow dressed in T-shirts and shortsarrive to deliver the briefcase, and Butch and Vincent briefly cross paths. The next day, Vincent drops by the house of Lance (Eric Stoltz) and his wife Jody (Rosanna Arquette) to purchase high-grade heroin. He shoots up before driving over to meet Mrs. Mia Wallace (Uma Thurman) and take her out. They head to Jack Rabbit Slim's, a 1950s-themed restaurant staffed by lookalikes of the decade's pop icons. Mia recounts her experience acting in a failed television pilot, "Fox Force Five".After participating in a twist contest, they return to the Wallace house with the trophy. While Vincent is in the bathroom, Mia finds his stash of heroin in his coat pocket. Mistaking it for cocaine, she snorts it and overdoses. Vincent rushes her to Lance's house for help. Together, they administer an adrenaline shot to Mia's heart, reviving her. Before parting ways, Mia and Vincent agree not to tell Marsellus of the incident.Television time for young Butch (Chandler Lindauer) is interrupted by the arrival of Vietnam veteran Captain Koons (Christopher Walken). Koons explains that he has brought a gold watch, passed down through generations of Coolidge men since World War I. Butch's father died of dysentery while in a POW camp, and at his dying request Koons hid the watch in his rectum for five years in order to deliver it to Butch. A bell rings, startling the adult Butch out of this reverie. He is in his boxing colorsit is time for the fight he has been paid to throw.Butch flees the arena, having won the bout. Making his getaway by taxi, he learns from the death-obsessed driver, Esmarelda Villalobos (Angela Jones), that he killed the opposing fighter. Butch has double-crossed Marsellus, betting his payoff on himself at very favorable odds. The next morning, at the motel where he and his girlfriend, Fabienne (Maria de Medeiros), are lying low, Butch discovers that she has forgotten to pack the irreplaceable watch. He returns to his apartment to retrieve it, although Marsellus's men are almost certainly looking for him. Butch finds the watch quickly, but thinking he is alone, pauses for a snack. Only then does he notice a machine pistol on the kitchen counter. Hearing the toilet flush, Butch readies the gun in time to kill a startled Vincent Vega exiting the bathroom.Butch drives away but while waiting at a traffic light, Marsellus walks by and recognizes him. Butch rams Marsellus with the car, then another automobile collides with his. After a foot chase the two men land in a pawnshop. The shopowner, Maynard (Duane Whitaker), captures them at gunpoint and ties them up in a half-basement area. Maynard is joined by Zed (Peter Greene); they take Marsellus to another room to rape him, leaving a silent masked figure referred to as "the gimp" to watch a tied-up Butch. Butch breaks loose and knocks out the gimp. He is about to flee when he decides to save Marsellus. As Zed is sodomizing Marsellus on a pommel horse, Butch kills Maynard with a katana. Marsellus retrieves Maynard's shotgun and shoots Zed in the groin. Marsellus informs Butch that they are even with respect to the botched fight fix, so long as he never tells anyone about the rape and departs Los Angeles forever. Butch agrees and returns to pick up Fabienne on Zed's chopper.The story returns to Vincent and Jules at Brett's. After they execute him, another man (Alexis Arquette) bursts out of the bathroom and shoots wildly at them, missing every time before an astonished Jules and Vincent return fire. Jules decides this is a miracle and a sign from God for him to retire as a hitman. They drive off with one of Brett's associates, Marvin (Phil LaMarr), their informant. Vincent asks Marvin for his opinion about the "miracle", and accidentally shoots him in the face.Forced to remove their bloodied car from the road, Jules calls upon the house of his friend Jimmie (Quentin Tarantino). Jimmie's wife, Bonnie, is due back from work soon and he is very anxious that she not encounter the scene. At Jules's request, Marsellus arranges for the help of Winston Wolf (Harvey Keitel). "The Wolf" takes charge of the situation, ordering Jules and Vincent to clean the car, hide the body in the trunk, dispose of their own bloody clothes, and change into T-shirts and shorts provided by Jimmie. They drive the car to a junkyard, from where Wolf and the owner's daughter, Raquel (Julia Sweeney), head off to breakfast and Jules and Vincent decide to do the same.As Jules and Vincent eat breakfast in a coffee shop the discussion returns to Jules's decision to retire. In a brief cutaway, we see "Pumpkin" and "Honey Bunny" shortly before they initiate the hold-up from the movie's first scene. While Vincent is in the bathroom, the hold-up commences. "Pumpkin" demands all of the patrons' valuables, including Jules's mysterious case. Jules surprises "Pumpkin" (whom he calls "Ringo"), holding him at gunpoint. "Honey Bunny" (whose name turns out to be Yolanda), hysterical, trains her gun on Jules. Vincent emerges from the restroom with his gun trained on her, creating a Mexican standoff. Reprising his pseudo-biblical passage, Jules expresses his ambivalence about his life of crime. As his first act of redemption, he allows the two robbers to take the cash they have stolen and leave, pondering how they were spared and leaving the briefcase to be returned to Marsellus, finishing the hitman's final job for his boss.The first element of what would become the Pulp Fiction screenplay was written by Roger Avary in the fall of 1990:The initial inspiration was the three-part horror anthology film Black Sabbath (1963), by Italian filmmaker Mario Bava. The TarantinoAvary project was provisionally titled "Black Mask", after the seminal hardboiled crime fiction magazine.[14] Tarantino's script was produced as Reservoir Dogs, his directorial debut; Avary's, titled "Pandemonium Reigns", would form the basis for the "Gold Watch" storyline of Pulp Fiction.[15]With work on Reservoir Dogs completed, Tarantino returned to the notion of a trilogy film: "I got the idea of doing something that novelists get a chance to do but filmmakers don't: telling three separate stories, having characters float in and out with different weights depending on the story."[16] Tarantino explains that the idea "was basically to take like the oldest chestnuts that you've ever seen when it comes to crime storiesthe oldest stories in the book.... You know, 'Vincent Vega and Marsellus Wallace's Wife'the oldest story about...the guy's gotta go out with the big man's wife and don't touch her. You know, you've seen the story a zillion times."[9] "I'm using old forms of storytelling and then purposely having them run awry", he says. "Part of the trick is to take these movie characters, these genre characters and these genre situations and actually apply them to some of real life's rules and see how they unravel."[17] In at least one case, boxer Butch Coolidge, Tarantino had in mind a specific character from a classic Hollywood crime story: "I wanted him to be basically like Ralph Meeker as Mike Hammer in Aldrich's Kiss Me Deadly [1955]. I wanted him to be a bully and a jerk".[18]Tarantino went to work on the script for Pulp Fiction in Amsterdam in March 1992.[19] He was joined there by Avary, who contributed "Pandemonium Reigns" to the project and participated in its rewriting as well as the development of the new storylines that would link up with it.[15] Two scenes originally written by Avary for the True Romance screenplay, exclusively credited to Tarantino, were incorporated into the opening of "The Bonnie Situation": the "miraculous" missed shots by the hidden gunman and the rear seat automobile killing.[20] The notion of the crimeworld "cleaner" that became the heart of the episode was inspired by a short, Curdled, that Tarantino saw at a film festival. He cast the lead actress, Angela Jones, in Pulp Fiction and later backed the filmmakers' production of a feature-length version of Curdled.[21] The script included a couple of made-up commercial brands that would feature often in later Tarantino films: Big Kahuna burgers (a Big Kahuna soda cup appears in Reservoir Dogs) and Red Apple cigarettes.[22] As he worked on the script, Tarantino also accompanied Reservoir Dogs around the European film festivals. Released in the U.S. in October 1992, the picture was a critical and commercial success. In January 1993, the Pulp Fiction script was complete.[23]Tarantino and his producer, Lawrence Bender, brought the script to Jersey Films, the production company run by Danny DeVito, Michael Shamberg, and Stacey Sher. Before even seeing Reservoir Dogs, Jersey had attempted to sign Tarantino for his next project.[24] Ultimately a development deal worth around $1 million had been struckthe deal gave A Band Apart, Bender and Tarantino's newly formed production company, initial financing and office facilities; Jersey got a share of the project and the right to shop the script to a studio.[25] Jersey had a distribution and "first look" deal with Columbia TriStar, which paid Tarantino for the right to consider exercising its option.[26] In February, Pulp Fiction appeared on a Variety list of films in preproduction at TriStar.[27] In June, however, the studio put the script into turnaround.[26] According to a studio executive, TriStar chief Mike Medavoy found it "too demented".[28] There were suggestions that TriStar was resistant to backing a film featuring a heroin user; there were also indications that the studio simply saw the project as too low-budget for its desired star-driven image.[29] Avarywho was about to start shooting his own directorial debut, Killing Zoehas said that TriStar's objections were comprehensive, encompassing the script's fundamental structure. He characterizes the studio's position: "'This is the worst thing ever written. It makes no sense. Someone's dead and then they're alive. It's too long, violent, and unfilmable.'... So I thought, 'That's that!'"[30]Bender brought the script to Miramax, the formerly independent studio that had recently been acquired by Disney. Harvey Weinsteinco-chairman of Miramax, along with his brother, Bobwas instantly enthralled by the script and the company picked it up.[31] Pulp Fiction, the first Miramax project to get a green light after the Disney acquisition, was budgeted at $8.5 million.[32] It became the first movie that Miramax completely financed.[33] Helping hold costs down was the plan Bender executed to pay all the main actors the same amount per week, regardless of their industry status.[34] The biggest star to sign on to the project was Bruce Willis. Though he had recently appeared in several big-budget flops, he was still a major overseas draw. On the strength of his name, Miramax garnered $11 million for the film's worldwide rights, virtually ensuring its profitability.[35]John Travolta as Vincent Vega: Tarantino cast Travolta in Pulp Fiction only because Michael Madsen, who had a major roleVic Vegain Reservoir Dogs, chose to appear in Kevin Costner's Wyatt Earp instead. Madsen was still rueing his choice over a decade later.[36] Harvey Weinstein pushed for Daniel Day-Lewis in the part.[37] Travolta accepted a bargain rate for his servicessources claim either $100,000 or $140,000but the film's success and his Oscar nomination as Best Actor revitalized his career.[38] Travolta was subsequently cast in several hits including Get Shorty, in which he played a similar character, and the John Woo blockbuster Face/Off. In 2004, Tarantino discussed an idea for a movie starring Travolta and Madsen as the Vega brothers; the concept remains unrealized.[39]Samuel L. Jackson as Jules Winnfield: Tarantino had written the part with Jackson in mind, but the actor nearly lost it after his first audition was overshadowed by Paul Caldern's. Jackson assumed the audition was merely a reading. Harvey Weinstein convinced Jackson to audition a second time, and his performance of the final diner scene won over Tarantino.[40] Jules was originally scripted with a giant afro, but Tarantino and Jackson agreed on the Jheri-curled wig seen in the film.[41] (One reviewer took it as a "tacit comic statement about the ghettoization of blacks in movies".)[42] Jackson received an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor. Calderon appears in the movie as Paul, a bartender at Marsellus's social club.Uma Thurman as Mia Wallace: Miramax favored Holly Hunter or Meg Ryan for the role. Alfre Woodard and Meg Tilly were also considered, but Tarantino wanted Thurman after their first meeting.[43][44] She dominated most of the film's promotional material, appearing on a bed with cigarette in hand. She was nominated for the Best Supporting Actress Oscar and was launched into the celebrity A-list. She took little advantage of her newfound fame, choosing not to do any big-budget films for the next three years.[45] Thurman would later star in Tarantino's two Kill Bill movies.Bruce Willis as Butch Coolidge: Willis was a major star, but most of his recent films had been box-office disappointments. As described by Peter Bart, taking a role in the modestly budgeted film "meant lowering his salary and risking his star status, but the strategy...paid off royally: Pulp Fiction not only brought Willis new respect as an actor, but also earned him several million dollars as a result of his gross participation."[48] Willis's appearance and physical presence were crucial to Tarantino's interest in casting him: "Bruce has the look of a 50s actor. I can't think of any other star that has that look."[18] Mickey Rourke was also considered for the role, but he turned the offer down.[49]Harvey Keitel as Winston Wolf or simply "The Wolf": The part was written specifically for Keitel, who had starred in Tarantino's Reservoir Dogs and was instrumental in getting it produced. In the filmmaker's words, "Harvey had been my favorite actor since I was 16 years old."[50] Keitel had played a character similarly employed as a "cleaner" in Point of No Return, released a year earlier.Tim Roth as "Pumpkin" or "Ringo": Roth had starred in Reservoir Dogs alongside Keitel and was brought on board again. He had used an American accent in the earlier film, but uses his natural, London one in Pulp Fiction. Though Tarantino had written the part specifically with Roth in mind, TriStar head Mike Medavoy preferred Johnny Depp or Christian Slater.[51]Amanda Plummer as Yolanda or "Honey Bunny": Tarantino wrote the role for Plummer, specifically to partner Roth onscreen. Roth had introduced the actress and director, telling Tarantino, "I want to work with Amanda in one of your films, but she has to have a really big gun."[52] Plummer followed up with director Michael Winterbottom's Butterfly Kiss, in which she plays a serial killer.Maria de Medeiros as Fabienne: Butch's girlfriend. Tarantino met the Portuguese actress while traveling with Reservoir Dogs around the European film festival circuit.[14] She had previously costarred with Thurman in Henry & June (1990), playing Anas Nin.Ving Rhames as Marsellus Wallace: Before Rhames was cast, the part was offered to Sid Haig, who had appeared in many classic exploitation movies of the 1970s. Haig passed on the role.[53] According to Bender, Rhames gave "one of the best auditions I've ever seen."[44] His acclaimed performance led to his being cast in big-budget features such as Mission Impossible, Con Air, and Out of Sight.[54]Eric Stoltz as Lance: Vincent's drug dealer. Courtney Love later reported that Kurt Cobain was originally offered the role of Lance; if he had taken it, Love would have played the role of his wife.[55] Tarantino, however, denies that he ever even met Cobain, much less offered him a role in the movie.[56] Several TriStar executives favored Gary Oldman for the part, based on his portrayal of a similar character in the Tarantino-written True Romance.[57]Rosanna Arquette as Jody: Lance's wife. Pam Grier read for the role, but Tarantino did not believe audiences would find it plausible for Lance to yell at her.[58] Grier was later cast as the lead of Tarantino's Jackie Brown. Ellen DeGeneres also read for Jody.[59]Christopher Walken as Captain Koons: Walken appears in a single scene, devoted to the Vietnam veteran's monologue about the gold watch. In 1993, Walken had appeared in another small but pivotal role in the "Sicilian scene" in True Romance.Bronagh Gallagher as Trudi: Jody's live-in friend. She and Jody discuss body piercing while Vincent is buying heroin.Principal photography commenced on September 20, 1993.[60] The lead offscreen talent had all worked with Tarantino on Reservoir Dogscinematographer Andrzej Sekua, film editor Sally Menke, production designer David Wasco, and costume designer Betsy Heimann. According to Tarantino, "[W]e had $8 million  [sic]. I wanted it to look like a $2025 million movie. I wanted it to look like an epic. It's an epic in everythingin invention, in ambition, in length, in scope, in everything except the price tag."[61] The film, he says, was shot "on 50 ASA film stock, which is the slowest stock they make. The reason we use it is that it creates an almost no-grain image, it's lustrous. It's the closest thing we have to 50s Technicolor."[62] The largest chunk of the budget$150,000went to creating the Jack Rabbit Slim's set.[63] It was built in a Culver City warehouse, where it was joined by several other sets as well as the film's production offices.[64] The diner sequence was shot on location in Hawthorne at the Hawthorne Grill, known for its Googie architecture.[65] For the costumes, Tarantino took his inspiration from French director Jean-Pierre Melville, who believed that the clothes his characters wore were their symbolic suits of armor.[47] Tarantino cast himself in a modest-sized role as he had in Reservoir Dogs. One of his pop totems, Fruit Brute, a long-discontinued General Mills cereal, also returned from the earlier film.[66] The shoot wrapped on November 30.[67] Before Pulp Fiction's premiere, Tarantino convinced Avary to forfeit his agreed-on cowriting credit and accept a "story by" credit, so the line "Written and directed by Quentin Tarantino" could be used in advertising and onscreen.[43]No film score was composed for Pulp Fiction, with Quentin Tarantino instead using an eclectic assortment of surf music, rock and roll, soul, and pop songs. Dick Dale's rendition of "Misirlou" plays during the opening credits. Tarantino chose surf music as the basic musical style for the film, but not, he insists, because of its association with surfing culture: "To me it just sounds like rock and roll, even Morricone music. It sounds like rock and roll spaghetti Western music."[68] Some of the songs were suggested to Tarantino by his friends Chuck Kelley and Laura Lovelace, who were credited as music consultants. Lovelace also appeared in the film as Laura, a waitress; she reprises the role in Jackie Brown.[69] The soundtrack album, Music from the Motion Picture Pulp Fiction, was released along with the film in 1994. The album peaked on the Billboard 200 chart at number 21.[70] The single, Urge Overkill's cover of the Neil Diamond song "Girl, You'll Be a Woman Soon", reached number 59.[71]Estella Tincknell describes how the particular combination of well-known and obscure recordings helps establish the film as a "self-consciously 'cool' text. [The] use of the mono-tracked, beat-heavy style of early 1960s U.S. 'underground' pop mixed with 'classic' ballads such as Dusty Springfield's 'Son of a Preacher Man' is crucial to the film's postmodern knowingness." She contrasts the soundtrack with that of Forrest Gump, the highest-grossing film of 1994, which also relies on period pop recordings: "[T]he version of 'the sixties' offered by Pulp Fiction...is certainly not that of the publicly recognized counter-culture featured in Forrest Gump, but is, rather, a more genuinely marginal form of sub-culture based around a lifestylesurfing, 'hanging'that is resolutely apolitical." The soundtrack is central, she says, to the film's engagement with the "younger, cinematically knowledgeable spectator" it solicits.[72]Pulp Fiction premiered in May 1994 at the Cannes Film Festival. The Weinsteins "hit the beach like commandos", bringing the picture's entire cast over.[73] The film was unveiled at a midnight hour screening and caused a sensation.[74][75] It won the Palme d'Or, the festival's top prize, generating a further wave of publicity.[76] The first U.S. review of the film was published on May 23 in industry trade magazine Variety. Todd McCarthy called Pulp Fiction a "spectacularly entertaining piece of pop culture...a startling, massive success."[77] From Cannes forward, Tarantino was on the road continuously, promoting the film.[78] Over the next few months it played in smaller festivals around Europe, building buzz: Nottingham, Munich, Taormina, Locarno, Norway, and San Sebastian.[79] Tarantino later said, "One thing that's cool is that by breaking up the linear structure, when I watch the film with an audience, it does break [the audience's] alpha state. It's like, all of a sudden, 'I gotta watch this...I gotta pay attention.' You can almost feel everybody moving in their seats. It's actually fun to watch an audience in some ways chase after a movie."[80] In late September, it opened the New York Film Festival. The New York Times published its review the day of the opening. Janet Maslin called the film a "triumphant, cleverly disorienting journey through a demimonde that springs entirely from Mr. Tarantino's ripe imagination, a landscape of danger, shock, hilarity and vibrant local color.... [He] has come up with a work of such depth, wit and blazing originality that it places him in the front ranks of American film makers."[75]On October 14, 1994, Pulp Fiction went into general release in the United States. As Peter Biskind describes, "It was not platformed, that is, it did not open in a handful of theaters and roll out slowly as word of mouth built, the traditional way of releasing an indie film; it went wide immediately, into 1,100 theaters."[1] In the eyes of some cultural critics, Reservoir Dogs had given Tarantino a reputation for glamorizing violence. Miramax played with the issue in its marketing campaign: "You won't know the facts till you've seen the fiction", went one slogan.[81] Pulp Fiction was the top-grossing film at the box office its first weekend, edging out a Sylvester Stallone vehicle, The Specialist, which was in its second week and playing at more than twice as many theaters. Against its budget of $8.5 million and about $10 million in marketing costs, Pulp Fiction wound up grossing $107.93 million at the U.S. box office, making it the first "indie" film to surpass $100 million. Worldwide, it took in nearly $213 million.[82] In terms of domestic grosses, it was the tenth biggest film of 1994, even though it played on substantially fewer screens than any other film in the top 20.[83] Popular engagement with the film, such as speculation about the contents of the precious briefcase, "indicates the kind of cult status that Pulp Fiction achieved almost immediately."[84] As MovieMaker puts it, "The movie was nothing less than a national cultural phenomenon."[85] Abroad, as well: In Britain, where it opened a week after its U.S. release, not only was the film a big hit, but in book form its screenplay became the most successful in UK publishing history, a top-ten bestseller.[86]The response of major American film reviewers was widely favorable. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times describing it as "so well-written in a scruffy, fanzine way that you want to rub noses in itthe noses of those zombie writers who take 'screenwriting' classes that teach them the formulas for 'hit films.'"[87] Richard Corliss of Time wrote, "It towers over the year's other movies as majestically and menacingly as a gang lord at a preschool. It dares Hollywood films to be this smart about going this far. If good directors accept Tarantino's implicit challenge, the movie theater could again be a great place to live in."[88] In Newsweek, David Ansen wrote, "The miracle of Quentin Tarantino's Pulp Fiction is how, being composed of secondhand, debased parts, it succeeds in gleaming like something new."[89] "You get intoxicated by it," wrote Entertainment Weekly's Owen Gleiberman, "high on the rediscovery of how pleasurable a movie can be. I'm not sure I've ever encountered a filmmaker who combined discipline and control with sheer wild-ass joy the way that Tarantino does."[42] "There's a special kick that comes from watching something this thrillingly alive", wrote Peter Travers of Rolling Stone. "Pulp Fiction is indisputably great."[90] Overall, the film attained exceptionally high ratings among U.S. reviewers: a 95% score at Rotten Tomatoes[91] and a Metascore of 94 on Metacritic.[92]The Los Angeles Times was one of the few major news outlets to publish a negative review on the film's opening weekend. Kenneth Turan wrote, "The writer-director appears to be straining for his effects. Some sequences, especially one involving bondage harnesses and homosexual rape, have the uncomfortable feeling of creative desperation, of someone who's afraid of losing his reputation scrambling for any way to offend sensibilities."[93] Some who reviewed it in the following weeks took more exception to the predominant critical reaction than to Pulp Fiction itself. While not panning the film, Stanley Kauffman of The New Republic felt that "the way that [it] has been so widely ravened up and drooled over verges on the disgusting. Pulp Fiction nourishes, abets, cultural slumming."[94] Responding to comparisons between Tarantino's film and the work of French New Wave director Jean-Luc Godard, especially his first, most famous feature, Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader wrote, "The fact that Pulp Fiction is garnering more extravagant raves than Breathless ever did tells you plenty about which kind of cultural references are regarded as more fruitfulnamely, the ones we already have and don't wish to expand."[95] Observing in the National Review that "[n]o film arrives with more advance hype", John Simon was unswayed: "titillation cures neither hollowness nor shallowness".[96]Debate about the film spread beyond the review pages. Violence was often the theme. In the Washington Post, Donna Britt described how she was happy not to see Pulp Fiction on a recent weekend and thus avoid "discussing the rousing scene in which a gunshot sprays somebody's brains around a car interior".[97] Some commentators took exception to the film's frequent use of the word "nigger". In the Chicago Tribune, Todd Boyd argued that the word's recurrence "has the ability to signify the ultimate level of hipness for white males who have historically used their perception of black masculinity as the embodiment of cool".[98] In Britain, James Wood, writing in The Guardian, set the tone for much subsequent criticism: "Tarantino represents the final triumph of postmodernism, which is to empty the artwork of all content, thus avoiding its capacity to do anything except helplessly represent our agonies.... Only in this age could a writer as talented as Tarantino produce artworks so vacuous, so entirely stripped of any politics, metaphysics, or moral interest."[99]Around the turn of the year, Pulp Fiction was named Best Picture by the National Society of Film Critics, National Board of Review, Los Angeles Film Critics Association, Boston Society of Film Critics, Society of Texas Film Critics, Southeastern Film Critics Association, and Kansas City Film Critics Circle.[100] Tarantino was named Best Director by all seven of those organizations as well as by the New York Film Critics Circle and Chicago Film Critics Association.[101] The screenplay won several prizes, with various awarding bodies ascribing credit differently. At the Golden Globe Awards, Tarantino, named as sole recipient of the Best Screenplay honor, failed to mention Avary in his acceptance speech.[102] In February 1995, the film received seven Oscar nominationsBest Picture, Director, Actor (Travolta), Supporting Actor (Jackson), Supporting Actress (Thurman), Original Screenplay, and Film Editing. Travolta, Jackson, and Thurman were each nominated as well for the 1st Screen Actors Guild Awards, presented on February 25, but none took home the honor.[103] At the Academy Awards ceremony the following month, Tarantino and Avary were announced as joint winners of the Oscar for Best Original Screenplay.[104] The furor around the film was still going strong: much of the March issue of Artforum was devoted to its critical dissection.[105] Pulp Fiction garnered four honors at the Independent Spirit Awards, held at the end of the month: best feature, director, male lead (Jackson), and screenplay (Tarantino).[106] At the British Academy Film Awards, Tarantino and Avary shared the BAFTA Award for Best Original Screenplay, and Jackson won for Best Supporting Actor.[107] The film was nominated for the Grand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics.[108]Pulp Fiction quickly came to be regarded as one of the most significant films of its era. In 1995, in a special edition of Siskel & Ebert devoted to Tarantino, Gene Siskel argued that Pulp Fiction posed a major challenge to the "ossification of American movies with their brutal formulas". In Siskel's view,the violent intensity of Pulp Fiction calls to mind other violent watershed films that were considered classics in their time and still are. Hitchcock's Psycho [1960], Arthur Penn's Bonnie and Clyde [1967], and Stanley Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange [1971]. Each film shook up a tired, bloated movie industry and used a world of lively lowlifes to reflect how dull other movies had become. And that, I predict, will be the ultimate honor for Pulp Fiction. Like all great films, it criticizes other movies.[109]Ken Dancyger writes that its "imitative and innovative style"like that of its predecessor, Reservoir Dogsrepresentsa new phenomenon, the movie whose style is created from the context of movie life rather than real life. The consequence is twofoldthe presumption of deep knowledge on the part of the audience of those forms such as the gangster films or Westerns, horror films or adventure films. And that the parody or alteration of that film creates a new form, a different experience for the audience.[110]In a widely covered speech on May 31, 1995, Republican presidential candidate Bob Dole attacked the American entertainment industry for peddling "nightmares of depravity". Pulp Fiction was soon associated with his charges concerning gratuitous violence. Dole had not, in fact, mentioned the film; he cited two less celebrated movies based on Tarantino screenplays, Natural Born Killers and True Romance.[111] In September 1996, Dole did accuse Pulp Fictionwhich he had not seenof promoting "the romance of heroin".[112]Paula Rabinowitz expresses the general film industry opinion that Pulp Fiction "simultaneously resurrected John Travolta and film noir".[113] In Peter Biskind's description, it created a "guys-with-guns frenzy".[114] The stylistic influence of Pulp Fiction soon became apparent. Less than a year after the picture's release, British critic Jon Ronson attended the National Film School's end-of-semester screenings and assessed the impact: "Out of the five student movies I watched, four incorporated violent shoot-outs over a soundtrack of iconoclastic 70s pop hits, two climaxed with all the main characters shooting each other at once, and one had two hitmen discussing the idiosyncrasies of The Brady Bunch before offing their victim. Not since Citizen Kane has one man appeared from relative obscurity to redefine the art of moviemaking."[115] Among the first Hollywood films cited as its imitators were Destiny Turns on the Radio (1995), in which Tarantino acted,[109] Things to Do in Denver When You're Dead (1995),[116] and 2 Days in the Valley (1996).[117] It "triggered a myriad of clones", writes Fiona Villella.[118] Internationally, according to David Desser, it "not only influenced a British brand of noir, but extended the noir vision virtually around the world."[119] Pulp Fiction's effect on film form was still reverberating in 2007, when David Denby of The New Yorker credited it with initiating the ongoing cycle of disordered cinematic narratives.[120]Its impact on Hollywood was deeper still. According to Variety, the trajectory of Pulp Fiction from Cannes launch to commercial smash "forever altered the game" of so-called independent cinema.[121] It "cemented Miramax's place as the reigning indie superpower",[1] writes Biskind. "Pulp became the Star Wars of independents, exploding expectations for what an indie film could do at the box office."[122] The film's large financial return on its small budgettransform[ed] the industry's attitude toward the lowly indies...spawning a flock of me-too classics divisions.... [S]mart studio executives suddenly woke up to the fact that grosses and market share, which got all the press, were not the same as profits.... Once the studios realized that they could exploit the economies of (small) scale, they more or less gave up buying or remaking the films themselves, and either bought the distributors, as Disney had Miramax, or started their own...copy[ing] Miramax's marketing and distribution strategies.[123]In 2001, Variety, noting the increasing number of actors switching back and forth between expensive studio films and low-budget independent or indie-style projects, suggested that the "watershed moment for movie stars" came with the decision by Willisone of Hollywood's highest-paid performersto appear in Pulp Fiction.[124]And its impact was even broader than that. It has been described as a "major cultural event", an "international phenomenon" that influenced television, music, literature, and advertising.[118][125] Not long after its release, it was identified as a significant focus of attention within the growing community of Internet users.[126] Adding Pulp Fiction to his roster of "Great Movies" in 2001, Roger Ebert called it "the most influential film of the decade".[127] Four years later, Time's Corliss wrote much the same: "(unquestionably) the most influential American movie of the 90s".[128]Several scenes and images from the film achieved iconic status; in 2008, Entertainment Weekly declared, "You'd be hard-pressed, by now, to name a moment from Quentin Tarantino's film that isn't iconic."[129] Jules and Vincent's "Royale with Cheese" dialogue became famous.[130] It was referenced more than a decade and a half later in the Travolta vehicle From Paris with Love.[131] The adrenalin shot to Mia Wallace's heart is on Premiere's list of "100 Greatest Movie Moments".[132] The scene of Travolta and Thurman's characters dancing has been frequently homaged, most unambiguously in the 2005 film Be Cool, starring the same two actors.[133] The image of Travolta and Jackson's characters standing side by side in suit and tie, pointing their guns, has also become widely familiar. In 2007, BBC News reported that "London transport workers have painted over an iconic mural by 'guerrilla artist' Banksy.... The image depicted a scene from Quentin Tarantino's Pulp Fiction, with Samuel L Jackson and John Travolta clutching bananas instead of guns."[134] Certain lines were adopted popularly as catchphrases, in particular Marsellus's threat, "I'm 'a get medieval on your ass."[135] Jules's "Ezekiel" recitation was voted the fourth greatest movie speech of all time in a 2004 poll.[136]Pulp Fiction now appears in several critical assessments of all-time great films. In 2008, Entertainment Weekly named it the best film of the past quarter-century.[129] That same year, the American Film Institute's "Ten Top Ten" poll ranked it number 7 all-time in the gangster film genre.[138] In 2007, it was voted 94th overall on the AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies list.[139] In 2005, it was named one of Time's "All-Time 100 Movies".[128] As of January 2010, it is number 10 on Metacritic's list of all-time highest scores.[140] The film ranks very highly in popular surveys. A 2008 Empire poll combining the opinions of readers, movie industry professionals, and critics named Pulp Fiction the ninth-best film of all time.[141] In a 2006 readers' poll by the British magazine Total Film, it ranked as the number three film in history.[142] It was voted as the fourth-greatest film of all time in a nationwide poll for Britain's Channel 4 in 2001.[143]Tarantino has stated that he originally planned "to do a Black Mask movie", referring to the magazine largely responsible for popularizing hardboiled detective fiction. "[I]t kind of went somewhere else".[144] Geoffrey O'Brien sees the result as connected "rather powerfully to a parallel pulp tradition: the tales of terror and the uncanny practiced by such writers as Cornell Woolrich [and] Fredric Brown.... Both dealt heavily in the realm of improbable coincidences and cruel cosmic jokes, a realm that Pulp Fiction makes its own."[145] In particular, O'Brien finds a strong affinity between the intricate plot mechanics and twists of Brown's novels and the recursive, interweaving structure of Pulp Fiction.[146] Philip French describes the film's narrative as a "circular movement or Mbius strip of a kind Resnais and Robbe-Grillet would admire."[147] James Mottram regards crime novelist Elmore Leonard, whose influence Tarantino has acknowledged, as the film's primary literary antecedent. He suggests that Leonard's "rich dialogue" is reflected in Tarantino's "popular-culture-strewn jive"; he also points to the acute, extremely dark sense of humor Leonard applies to the realm of violence as a source of inspiration.[148]Robert Kolker sees the "flourishes, the apparent witty banality of the dialogue, the goofy fracturing of temporality [as] a patina over a pastiche. The pastiche...is essentially of two films that Tarantino can't seem to get out of his mind: Mean Streets [1973; directed by Martin Scorsese] and The Killing [1956; directed by Stanley Kubrick]."[149] He contrasts Pulp Fiction with postmodern Hollywood predecessors Hudson Hawk (1991; starring Willis) and Last Action Hero (1993; starring Arnold Schwarzenegger) that "took the joke too far...simply mocked or suggested that they were smarter than the audience" and flopped.[150] Todd McCarthy writes that the film's "striking widescreen compositions often contain objects in extreme close-up as well as vivid contrasts, sometimes bringing to mind the visual strategies of Sergio Leone", an acknowledged hero of Tarantino's.[77] To Martin Rubin, the "expansive, brightly colored widescreen visuals" evoke comedy directors such as Frank Tashlin and Blake Edwards.[151]The movie's host of pop culture allusions, ranging from the famous image of Marilyn Monroe's skirt flying up over a subway grating to Jules addressing a soon-to-be victim as "Flock of Seagulls" because of his haircut,[152] have led many critics to discuss it within the framework of postmodernism. Describing the film in 2005 as Tarantino's "postmodern masterpiece...to date", David Walker writes that it "is marked by its playful reverence for the 1950s...and its constantly teasing and often deferential references to other films". He characterizes its convoluted narrative technique as "postmodern tricksiness".[153] Calling the film a "terminally hip postmodern collage", Foster Hirsch finds Pulp Fiction far from a masterpiece: "authoritative, influential, and meaningless". Set "in a world that could exist only in the movies", it is "a succulent guilty pleasure, beautifully made junk food for cinastes".[154] O'Brien, dismissing attempts to associate the movie with film noir, argues that "Pulp Fiction is more a guided tour of an infernal theme park decorated with cultural detritus, Buddy Holly and Mamie Van Doren, fragments of blaxploitation and Roger Corman and Shogun Assassin, music out of a twenty-four-hour oldies station for which all the decades since the fifties exist simultaneously."[6] Catherine Constable takes the moment in which a needle filled with adrenaline is plunged into the comatose Mia's heart as exemplary. She proposes that it "can be seen as effecting her resurrection from the dead, simultaneously recalling and undermining the Gothic convention of the vampire's stake. On this model, the referencing of previous aesthetic forms and styles moves beyond...empty pastiche, sustaining an 'inventive and affirmative' mode of postmodernism."[155]Mark T. Conard asks, "[W]hat is the film about?" and answers, "American nihilism."[156] Hirsch suggests, "If the film is actually about anything other than its own cleverness, it seems dedicated to the dubious thesis that hit men are part of the human family."[117] Richard Alleva argues that "Pulp Fiction has about as much to do with actual criminality or violence as Cyrano de Bergerac with the realities of seventeenth-century France or The Prisoner of Zenda with Balkan politics." He reads the movie as a form of romance whose allure is centered in the characters' nonnaturalistic discourse, "wise-guy literate, media-smart, obscenely epigrammatic".[157] In Alan Stone's view, the "absurd dialogue", like that between Vincent and Jules in the scene where the former accidentally kills Marvin, "unexpectedly transforms the meaning of the violence clich.... Pulp Fiction unmasks the macho myth by making it laughable and deheroicizes the power trip glorified by standard Hollywood violence."[158] Stone reads the film as "politically correct. There is no nudity and no violence directed against women.... [It] celebrates interracial friendship and cultural diversity; there are strong women and strong black men, and the director swims against the current of class stereotype."[158]Where Stone sees a celebration, Kolker finds a vacuum: "The postmodern insouciance, violence, homophobia, and racism of Pulp Fiction were perfectly acceptable because the film didn't pretend seriousness and therefore didn't mock it."[150] Calling it the "acme of postmodern nineties filmmaking", he explains, "the postmodern is about surfaces; it is flattened spatiality in which event and character are in a steady state of reminding us that they are pop-cultural figures."[159] According to Kolker,That's why Pulp Fiction was so popular. Not because all audiences got all or any of its references to Scorsese and Kubrick, but because the narrative and spatial structure of the film never threatened to go beyond themselves into signification. The film's cycle of racist and homophobic jokes might threaten to break out into a quite nasty view of the world, but this nastiness keeps being laughed offby the mock intensity of the action, the prowling, confronting, perverse, confined, and airless nastiness of the world Tarantino creates.[160]Henry A. Giroux argues that Tarantino "empties violence of any critical social consequences, offering viewers only the immediacy of shock, humor, and irony-without-insight as elements of mediation. None of these elements gets beyond the seduction of voyeuristic gazing...[t]he facile consumption of shocking images and hallucinatory delight."[161]Pulp Fiction is full of homages to other movies. "Tarantino's characters", writes Gary Groth, "inhabit a world where the entire landscape is composed of Hollywood product. Tarantino is a cinematic kleptomaniache literally can't help himself."[162] Two scenes in particular have prompted discussion of the film's highly intertextual style. Many have assumed that the dance sequence at Jack Rabbit Slim's was intended as a reference to Travolta's star-making performance as Tony Manero in the epochal Saturday Night Fever (1977); Tarantino, however, credits a scene in the Jean-Luc Godard film Bande  part (1964) with the inspiration. According to the filmmaker,Everybody thinks that I wrote this scene just to have John Travolta dancing. But the scene existed before John Travolta was cast. But once he was cast, it was like, "Great. We get to see John dance. All the better."...My favorite musical sequences have always been in Godard, because they just come out of nowhere. It's so infectious, so friendly. And the fact that it's not a musical, but he's stopping the movie to have a musical sequence, makes it all the more sweet.[163]Jerome Charyn argues that, beyond "all the better", Travolta's presence is essential to the power of the scene, and of the film:Travolta's entire career becomes "backstory", the myth of a movie star who has fallen out of favor, but still resides in our memory as the king of disco. We keep waiting for him to shed his paunch, put on a white polyester suit, and enter the 2001 Odyssey club in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, where he will dance for us and never, never stop. Daniel Day-Lewis couldn't have woken such a powerful longing in us. He isn't part of America's own mad cosmology.... Tony Manero [is] an angel sitting on Vince's shoulder.... [Vince and Mia's] actual dance may be closer to the choreography of Anna Karina's shuffle with her two bumbling gangster boyfriends in Bande  part, but even that reference is lost to us, and we're with Tony again....[164]Estella Tincknell notes that while the "diner setting seems to be a simulacrum of a 'fifties' restaurant...the twist contest is a musical sequence which evokes 'the sixties,' while Travolta's dance performance inevitably references 'the seventies' and his appearance in Saturday Night Fever.... The 'past' thus becomes a more general 'pastness' in which the stylistic signifiers of various decades are loaded in to a single moment."[165] She also argues that in this passage the film "briefly shifts from its habitually ironic discourse to one that references the conventions of the classic film musical and in doing so makes it possible for the film to inhabit an affective space that goes beyond stylistic allusion."[165]The pivotal moment in which Marsellus crosses the street in front of Butch's car and notices him evokes the scene in which Marion Crane's boss sees her under similar circumstances in Psycho.[166] Marsellus and Butch are soon held captive by Maynard and Zed, "two sadistic honkies straight out of Deliverance" (1972), directed by John Boorman.[158] Zed shares a name with Sean Connery's character in Boorman's follow-up, the science-fiction film Zardoz (1974). When Butch decides to rescue Marsellus, in Glyn White's words, "he finds a trove of items with film-hero resonances".[167] Critics have identified these weapons with a range of possible allusions:At the conclusion of the scene, a portentous line of Marsellus's echoes one from the 1973 crime drama Charley Varrick, directed by another of Tarantino's heroes, Don Siegel; the name of the character who speaks it there is Maynard.[169]David Bell argues that far from going against the "current of class stereotype", this scene, like Deliverance, "mobilize[s] a certain construction of poor white country folkand particularly their sexualization...'rustic sexual expression often takes the form of homosexual rape' in American movies."[170] Stephen Paul Miller believes the Pulp Fiction scene goes down much easier than the one it echoes: "The buggery perpetrated is not at all as shocking as it was in Deliverance.... The nineties film reduces seventies competition, horror, and taboo into an entertainingly subtle adrenaline playa fiction, a pulp fiction."[171] Giroux reads the rape scene homage similarly: "in the end Tarantino's use of parody is about repetition, transgression, and softening the face of violence by reducing it to the property of film history."[172] In Groth's view, the crucial difference is that "in Deliverance the rape created the film's central moral dilemma whereas in Pulp Fiction it was merely 'the single weirdest day of [Butch's] life.'"[173]Neil Fulwood focuses on Butch's weapon selection, writing, "Here, Tarantino's love of movies is at its most open and nonjudgemental, tipping a nod to the noble and the notorious, as well as sending up his own reputation as an enfant terrible of movie violence. Moreover, the scene makes a sly comment about the readiness of cinema to seize upon whatever is to hand for its moments of mayhem and murder."[168] White asserts that "the katana he finally, and significantly, selects identifies him with...honourable heroes."[167] Conard argues that the first three items symbolize a nihilism that Butch is rejecting. The traditional Japanese sword, in contrasts, represents a culture with a well-defined moral code and thus connects Butch with a more meaningful approach to life.[174]Robert Miklitsch argues that "Tarantino's telephilia" may be more central to the guiding sensibility of Pulp Fiction than the filmmaker's love for rock 'n' roll and even cinema:Talking about his generation, one that came of age in the '70s, Tarantino has commented that the "number one thing we all shared wasn't music, that was a Sixties thing. Our culture was television." A random list of the TV programs referenced in Pulp Fiction confirms his observation: Speed Racer, Clutch Cargo, The Brady Bunch, The Partridge Family, The Avengers, The Three Stooges, The Flintstones, I Spy, Green Acres, Kung Fu, Happy Days, and last but not least, Mia's fictional pilot, Fox Force Five.[175]"The above list, with the possible exception of The Avengers," writes Miklitsch, "suggests that Pulp Fiction has less of an elective affinity with the cinematic avant-gardism of Godard than with mainstream network programming."[176] Jonathan Rosenbaum had brought TV into his analysis of the Tarantino/Godard comparison, acknowledging that the directors were similar in wanting to cram everything they like onscreen: "But the differences between what Godard likes and what Tarantino likes and why are astronomical; it's like comparing a combined museum, library, film archive, record shop, and department store with a jukebox, a video-rental outlet, and an issue of TV Guide."[95]Sharon Willis focuses on the way a television show (Clutch Cargo) marks the beginning of, and plays on through, the scene between young Butch and his father's comrade-in-arms. The Vietnam War veteran is played by Christopher Walken, whose presence in the role evokes his performance as a traumatized G.I. in the 1978 Vietnam War movie The Deer Hunter. Willis writes that "when Captain Koons enters the living room, we see Walken in his function as an image retrieved from a repertoire of 1970s television and movie versions of ruined masculinity in search of rehabilitation.... [T]he gray light of the television presiding over the scene seems to inscribe the ghostly paternal gaze."[177] Miklitsch asserts that, for some critics, the film is a "prime example of the pernicious ooze-like influence of mass culture exemplified by their bte noire: TV."[176] Kolker might not disagree, arguing that "Pulp Fiction is a simulacrum of our daily exposure to television; its homophobes, thugs and perverts, sentimental boxers and pimp promoters move through a series of long-take tableaux: we watch, laugh, and remain with nothing to comprehend."[160]The combination of the mysterious suitcase is 666, the "number of the beast". Tarantino has said that there is no explanation for its contentsit is simply a MacGuffin, a pure plot device. Originally, the case was to contain diamonds, but this was seen as too mundane. For filming purposes, it contained a hidden orange light bulb that produced an otherworldly glow.[180] In a 2007 video interview with fellow director and friend Robert Rodriguez, Tarantino purportedly "reveals" the secret contents of the briefcase, but the film cuts out and skips the scene in the style employed in Tarantino and Rodriguez's Grindhouse (2007), with an intertitle that reads "Missing Reel". The interview resumes with Rodriguez discussing how radically the "knowledge" of the briefcase's contents alters one's understanding of the movie.[181]Despite Tarantino's statements, many solutions to what one scholar calls this "unexplained postmodern puzzle" have been proposed.[84] A strong similarity has often been observed with the 1955 film noir Kiss Me Deadly. That movie, whose protagonist Tarantino has cited as a source for Butch, features a glowing briefcase housing an atomic explosive.[182] In their review of Alex Cox's 1984 film Repo Man in the Daily Telegraph, Nick Cowen and Hari Patience suggest that Pulp Fiction may also owe "a debt of inspiration" to the glowing car trunk in that film.[183] In scholar Paul Gormley's view, this connection with Kiss Me Deadly, and a similar one with Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981), makes it possible to read the eerie glow as symbolic of violence itself.[184] To Susan Fraiman, the unseen contents represent "defended, mystified, male interiority. Much valued, much vaunted, and never finally shown, this radiant, indefinable softness is locked within a hard, exterior shell. Even Jules, who wants to lose the baggage of a barricaded self, walks out of the movie clutching it still."[185] The idea that the briefcase contains Marsellus's soul gained popular currency in the mid-1990s. Analyzing the notion, Roger Ebert dismissed it as "nothing more than a widely distributed urban legend given false credibility by the mystique of the Net".[186]Jules ritually recites what he describes as a biblical passage, Ezekiel 25:17, before he executes someone. We hear the passage three timesin the introductory sequence in which Jules and Vincent reclaim Marsellus's briefcase from the doomed Brett; that same recitation a second time, at the beginning of "The Bonnie Situation", which overlaps the end of the earlier sequence; and in the epilogue at the diner. The first version of the passage is as follows:The second version, from the diner scene, is identical except for the final line: "And you will know I am the Lord when I lay my vengeance upon you."While the final two sentences of Jules's speech are similar to the actual cited passage, the first two are fabricated from various biblical phrases.[187] The text of Ezekiel 25 preceding verse 17 indicates that God's wrath is retribution for the hostility of the Philistines. In the King James version from which Jules's speech is adapted, Ezekiel 25:17 reads in its entirety, "And I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious rebukes; and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall lay my vengeance upon them."[188] Tarantino's primary inspiration for the speech was the work of Japanese martial arts star Sonny Chiba. Its text and its identification as Ezekiel 25:17 derive from an almost identical creed that appears at the beginning of the Chiba movie Karate Kiba (The Bodyguard; 1976), where it is both shown as a scrolling text and read by an offscreen narrator.[189] In the 1980s television series Kage no Gundan (Shadow Warriors), Chiba's character would lecture the villain-of-the-week about how the world must be rid of evil before killing him.[190] A killer delivers a similar biblical rant in Modesty Blaise, the hardback but pulp-style novel Vincent is shown with in two scenes.[191]Two critics who have analyzed the role of the speech find different ties between Jules's transformation and the issue of postmodernity. Gormley argues that unlike the film's other major charactersMarsellus asideJules islinked to a "thing" beyond postmodern simulation.... [T]his is perhaps most marked when he moves on from being a simulation of a Baptist preacher, spouting Ezekiel because it was "just a cool thing to say...." In his conversion, Jules is shown to be cognizant of a place beyond this simulation, which, in this case, the film constructs as God.[192]Adele Reinhartz writes that the "depth of Jules's transformation" is indicated by the difference in his two deliveries of the passage: "In the first, he is a majestic and awe-inspiring figure, proclaiming the prophecy with fury and self-righteousness.... In the second...he appears to be a different sort of man altogether.... [I]n true postmodern fashion, [he] reflects on the meaning of his speech and provides several different ways that it might pertain to his current situation."[193] Similar to Gormley, Conard argues that as Jules reflects on the passage, it dawns on him "that it refers to an objective framework of value and meaning that is absent from his life"; to Conard, this contrasts with the film's prevalent representation of a nihilistic culture.[194] Rosenbaum finds much less in Jules's revelation: "[T]he spiritual awakening at the end of Pulp Fiction, which Jackson performs beautifully, is a piece of jive avowedly inspired by kung-fu movies. It may make you feel good, but it certainly doesn't leave you any wiser."[195]Much of Pulp Fiction's action revolves around characters who are in the bathroom or need to use the toilet; Tarantino's other films also feature this trope, though to a lesser extent.[196] At Jack Rabbit Slim's, Mia goes to "powder her nose"literally; she snorts coke in the restroom, surrounded by a bevy of women vainly primping. Butch and Fabienne play an extended scene in their motel bathroom, he in the shower, she brushing her teeth; the next morning, but just a few seconds later in screen time, she is again brushing her teeth. As Jules and Vincent confront Brett and two of his pals, a fourth man is hiding in the bathroomhis actions will lead to Jules's transformative "moment of clarity". After Marvin's absurd death, Vincent and Jules wash up in Jimmie's bathroom, where they get into a contretemps over a bloody hand towel.[120] When the diner hold-up turns into a Mexican standoff, "Honey Bunny" whines, "I gotta go pee!"[197]As described by Peter and Will Brooker, "In three significant moments Vincent retires to the bathroom [and] returns to an utterly changed world where death is threatened."[198] The threat increases in magnitude as the narrative progresses chronologically, and is realized in the third instance:In the Brookers' analysis, "Through Vince...we see the contemporary world as utterly contingent, transformed, disastrously, in the instant you are not looking."[198] Fraiman finds it particularly significant that Vincent is reading Modesty Blaise in two of these instances. She links this fact with the traditional derisive view of women as "the archetypal consumers of pulp":Locating popular fiction in the bathroom, Tarantino reinforces its association with shit, already suggested by the dictionary meanings of "pulp" that preface the movie: moist, shapeless matter; also, lurid stories on cheap paper. What we have then is a series of damaging associationspulp, women, shitthat taint not only male producers of mass-market fiction but also male consumers. Perched on the toilet with his book, Vincent is feminized by sitting instead of standing as well as by his trashy tastes; preoccupied by the anal, he is implicitly infantilized and homosexualized; and the seemingly inevitable result is being pulverized by Butch with a Czech M61 submachine gun. That this fate has to do with Vincent's reading habits is strongly suggested by a slow tilt from the book on the floor directly up to the corpse spilled into the tub.[199]Willis reads Pulp Fiction in almost precisely the opposite direction, finding "its overarching project as a drive to turn shit into gold. This is one way of describing the project of redeeming and recycling popular culture, especially the popular culture of one's childhood, as is Tarantino's wont as well as his stated aim."[177] Despite that, argues Fraiman, "Pulp Fiction demonstrates...that even an open pulpophile like Tarantino may continue to feel anxious and emasculated by his preferences."[197]Pulp Fiction won the following major honors:[76][104][107][200][201]Best Original Screenplay  Quentin Tarantino and Roger AvaryBest Supporting Actor  Samuel L. Jackson
Best Original Screenplay  Quentin Tarantino/Roger AvaryPalme d'Or  Pulp Fiction (Quentin Tarantino, director)Best Screenplay (Motion Picture)  Quentin TarantinoBest Film  Pulp Fiction (Quentin Tarantino, director)
Best Director  Quentin Tarantino
Best Screenplay  Quentin Tarantino and Roger AvaryIt also received the following nominations:[104][107][200]Best Picture (Lawrence Bender, producer) | Best Director (Quentin Tarantino)
Best Actor (John Travolta)
Best Supporting Actress (Uma Thurman) | Best Supporting Actor (Samuel L. Jackson) | Best Film Editing (Sally Menke)Best Film (Lawrence Bender/Quentin Tarantino) | Achievement in Direction (Quentin Tarantino)
Best Actress in a Leading Role (Uma Thurman) | Best Actor in a Leading Role (John Travolta)
Best Cinematography (Andrzej Sekua) | Best Editing (Sally Menke) | Best Sound (Stephen Hunter Flick/Ken King/Rick Ash/David Zupancic)Best Motion Picture (Drama) (Lawrence Bender) | Best Director (Motion Picture) (Quentin Tarantino)
Best Actor (Motion PictureDrama) (John Travolta)
Best Supporting Actor (Motion Picture) (Samuel L. Jackson) | Best Supporting Actress (Motion Picture) (Uma Thurman)In the balloting by the National Society of Film Critics, Samuel L. Jackson was the runner-up in both the Best Actor and the Best Supporting Actor categories.[201]    May 1994(1994-05) (Cannes)October 14, 1994(1994-10-14) (US)1 Narrative structure2 Plot

2.1 Vincent Vega and Marsellus Wallace's Wife
2.2 The Gold Watch
2.3 The Bonnie Situation

2.1 Vincent Vega and Marsellus Wallace's Wife2.2 The Gold Watch2.3 The Bonnie Situation3 Development and production

3.1 Writing
3.2 Financing
3.3 Cast
3.4 Filming
3.5 Music

3.1 Writing3.2 Financing3.3 Cast3.4 Filming3.5 Music4 Reception

4.1 Release and box office
4.2 Critical response
4.3 Awards season

4.1 Release and box office4.2 Critical response4.3 Awards season5 Influence and reputation6 Critical analysis

6.1 Homage as essence

6.1.1 Cinema
6.1.2 Television


6.2 Notable motifs

6.2.1 The mysterious 666 briefcase
6.2.2 Jules's Bible passage
6.2.3 The bathroom



6.1 Homage as essence

6.1.1 Cinema
6.1.2 Television

6.1.1 Cinema6.1.2 Television6.2 Notable motifs

6.2.1 The mysterious 666 briefcase
6.2.2 Jules's Bible passage
6.2.3 The bathroom

6.2.1 The mysterious 666 briefcase6.2.2 Jules's Bible passage6.2.3 The bathroom7 Awards8 Notes9 Bibliography10 External links2.1 Vincent Vega and Marsellus Wallace's Wife2.2 The Gold Watch2.3 The Bonnie Situation3.1 Writing3.2 Financing3.3 Cast3.4 Filming3.5 Music4.1 Release and box office4.2 Critical response4.3 Awards season6.1 Homage as essence

6.1.1 Cinema
6.1.2 Television

6.1.1 Cinema6.1.2 Television6.2 Notable motifs

6.2.1 The mysterious 666 briefcase
6.2.2 Jules's Bible passage
6.2.3 The bathroom

6.2.1 The mysterious 666 briefcase6.2.2 Jules's Bible passage6.2.3 The bathroom6.1.1 Cinema6.1.2 Television6.2.1 The mysterious 666 briefcase6.2.2 Jules's Bible passage6.2.3 The bathroomhammerThe Toolbox Murders (1978)[168]baseball batWalking Tall (1973);[167] The Untouchables (1987)[168]chainsawThe Texas Chain Saw Massacre (1974);[167][168] The Evil Dead II (1987)[167]katana (samurai sword)many, including Seven Samurai (1954);[167][168] The Yakuza (1975);[167] Shogun Assassin (1980)[168]Barker, Martin, and Thomas Austin (2000). From Antz to Titanic: Reinventing Film Analysis (Pluto Press). ISBN 0-7453-1579-8Bart, Peter (2000). The Gross: The Hits, the FlopsThe Summer That Ate Hollywood (New York: St. Martin's). ISBN 0-312-25391-5Bell, David (2000). "Eroticizing the Rural", in De-Centering Sexualities: Politics and Representations Beyond the Metropolis, ed. David Shuttleton, Diane Watt, and Richard Phillips (London and New York: Routledge). ISBN 0-415-19466-0Biskind, Peter (2004). Down and Dirty Pictures: Miramax, Sundance, and the Rise of Independent Film (New York: Simon & Schuster). ISBN 0-684-86259-XBrooker, Peter, and Will Brooker (1996). "Pulpmodernism: Tarantino's Affirmative Action", in Film Theory: Critical Concepts in Media and Cultural Studies, ed. Philip Simpson, Andrew Utterson, and Karen J. Shepherdson (London and New York: Routledge). ISBN 0-415-25971-1Charyn, Jerome (2006). Raised by Wolves: The Turbulent Art and Times of Quentin Tarantino (New York: Thunder's Mouth Press). ISBN 1-56025-858-6Christopher, Nicholas (2006). Somewhere in the Night: Film Noir and the American City (Emeryville, Calif.: Shoemaker & Hoard). ISBN 1-59376-097-3Conard, Mark T. (2006). "Symbolism, Meaning, and Nihilism in Pulp Fiction", in The Philosophy of Film Noir, ed. Mark T. Conard (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky). ISBN 0-8131-2377-1Constable, Catherine (2004). "Postmodernism and Film", in The Cambridge Companion to Postmodernism, ed. Steven Connor (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). ISBN 0-521-64840-8Dancyger, Ken (2002). The Technique of Film and Video Editing: History, Theory, and Practice, 3d ed. (New York: Focal Press). ISBN 0-240-80420-1Dargis, Manohla (1994a). "Pulp Instincts", Sight and Sound 4, no. 5 (May). Collected in Quentin Tarantino: Interviews, ed. Gerald Peary (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 1998). ISBN 1-57806-051-6Dargis, Manohla (1994b). "Quentin Tarantino on Pulp Fiction", Sight and Sound 4, no. 11 (November).Davis, Todd F., and Kenneth Womack (1998). "Shepherding the Weak: The Ethics of Redemption in Quentin Tarantinos Pulp Fiction", Literature/Film Quarterly 26, no. 1.Dawson, Jeff (1995). Quentin Tarantino: The Cinema of Cool (New York and London: Applause). ISBN 1-55783-227-7Desser, David (2003). "Global Noir: Genre Film in the Age of Transnationalism", in Film Genre Reader III, ed. Barry Keith Grant (Austin: University of Texas Press). ISBN 0-292-70185-3Dinshaw, Carolyn (1997). "Getting Medieval: Pulp Fiction, Gawain, Foucault", in The Book and the Body, ed. Dolores Warwick Frese and Katherine O'Brien O'Keeffe (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press). ISBN 0-268-00700-4Ebert, Roger (1997). Questions for the Movie Answer Man (Kansas City, Mo.: Andrews McMeel). ISBN 0-8362-2894-4Fraiman, Susan (2003). Cool Men and the Second Sex (New York: Columbia University Press). ISBN 0-231-12962-9Fulwood, Neil (2003). One Hundred Violent Films that Changed Cinema (London and New York: Batsford/Sterling). ISBN 0-7134-8819-0Gallafent, Edward (2006). Quentin Tarantino (London: Pearson Longman). ISBN 0-582-47304-7Giroux, Henry A. (1996). Fugitive Cultures: Race, Violence, and Youth (London and New York: Routledge). ISBN 0-415-91577-5Gormley, Paul (2005). The New-Brutality Film: Race and Affect in Contemporary Hollywood Cinema (Bristol, UK, and Portland, Ore.: Intellect). ISBN 1-84150-119-0Groth, Gary (1997). "A Dream of Perfect Reception: The Movies of Quentin Tarantino", in Commodify Your Dissent: Salvos from The Baffler, ed. Thomas Frank and Matt Weiland (New York: W.W. Norton). ISBN 0-393-31673-4Hirsch, Foster (1997). "Afterword", in Crime Movies, exp. ed., Carlos Clarens (Cambridge, Mass.: Da Capo). ISBN 0-306-80768-8Hoffman, David (2005). The Breakfast Cereal Gourmet (Kansas City, Mo.: Andrews McMeel). ISBN 0-7407-5029-1King, Geoff (2002). Film Comedy (London: Wallflower Press). ISBN 1-903364-35-3Kolker, Robert (2000). A Cinema of Loneliness: Penn, Stone, Kubrick, Scorsese, Spielberg, Altman, 3d ed. (New York: Oxford University Press). ISBN 0-19-512350-6Miller, Stephen Paul (1999). The Seventies Now: Culture As Surveillance (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press). ISBN 0-8223-2166-1Mottram, James (2006). The Sundance Kids: How the Mavericks Took Back Hollywood (New York:Macmillan). ISBN 0-571-22267-6O'Brien, Geoffrey (1994). "Quentin Tarantino's Pulp Fantastic", in Castaways of the Image Planet: Movies, Show Business, Public Spectacle (Washington, D.C.: Counterpoint). ISBN 1-58243-190-6Parker, Philip (2002). The Art and Science of Screenwriting, 2d ed. (Bristol, UK: Intellect). ISBN 1-84150-065-8Polan, Dana. (2000). Pulp Fiction (London: BFI). ISBN 0-85170-808-0Rabinowitz, Paula (2002). Black & White & Noir: America's Pulp Modernism (New York: Columbia University Press). ISBN 0-231-11480-XReal, Michael R. (1996). Exploring Media Culture: A Guide (Thousand Oaks, Calif., London, and New Delhi: Sage). ISBN 0-8039-5877-3Reinhartz, Adele (2003). Scripture on the Silver Screen (Louisville, Ky.: Westminster John Knox Press). ISBN 0-664-22359-1Rubin, Nathan (1999). Thrillers (Cambridge, New York, and Melbourne: Cambridge University Press). ISBN 0-521-58839-1Silver, Alain, and James Ursini (2004). Film Noir (Cologne: Taschen). ISBN 3-8228-2261-2Tarantino, Quentin (1994). Pulp Fiction: A Screenplay (New York: Hyperion/Miramax). ISBN 0-7868-8104-6Thomas, Brian (2003). VideoHound's Dragon: Asian Action & Cult Flicks (Canton, Mich.: Visible Ink Press). ISBN 1-57859-141-4Tincknell, Estella (2006). "The Soundtrack Movie, Nostalgia and Consumption", in Film's Musical Moments, ed. Ian Conrich and Estella Tincknell (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press). ISBN 0-7486-2344-2Walker, David (2005). "Tarantino, Quentin", in The Routledge Companion to Postmodernism, 2d ed., ed. Stuart Sim (London and New York: Routledge). ISBN 0-415-33358-XWaxman, Sharon (2005). Rebels on the Backlot: Six Maverick Directors and How They Conquered the Hollywood Studio System (New York: HarperCollins). ISBN 0-06-054017-6White, Glyn (2002). "Quentin Tarantino", in Fifty Contemporary Filmmakers, ed. Yvonne Tasker (London and New York: Routledge). ISBN 0-415-18973-XWillis, Sharon (1997). High Contrast: Race and Gender in Contemporary Hollywood Film (Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press). ISBN 0-8223-2041-XPulp Fiction at the Internet Movie DatabasePulp Fiction at AllRoviPulp Fiction at Box Office MojoPulp Fiction at MetacriticPulp Fiction at Rotten TomatoesPulp Fiction bibliography (via UC Berkeley)The Last Picture Show is a 1971 American drama film directed by Peter Bogdanovich, adapted from a semi-autobiographical 1966 novel of the same name by Larry McMurtry.Set in a small town in north Texas during the year November 1951  October 1952, it is about the coming of age of Sonny Crawford (Timothy Bottoms) and his friend Duane Jackson (Jeff Bridges). The cast includes Cybill Shepherd in her film debut, Ben Johnson, Eileen Brennan, Ellen Burstyn, Cloris Leachman, Clu Gulager, Randy Quaid in his film debut and John Hillerman. For aesthetic and technical reasons it was shot in black and white, which was unusual for its time.The film was nominated for eight Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director, and four nominations for acting: Ben Johnson and Jeff Bridges for Best Supporting Actor, and Ellen Burstyn and Cloris Leachman for Best Supporting Actress. It won two: Johnson and Leachman.In 1951, Sonny Crawford (Bottoms) and Duane Jackson (Bridges) are small-town Texas high-school seniors. They are friends and co-captains of Anarene High School's football team and share a rooming house home and a battered old pickup truck. Duane is good-looking, amusing and popular, and dates Jacy Farrow (Shepherd), the prettiest (and wealthiest) girl in town. Sonny is sensitive and caring, with a dumpy, unpleasant girlfriend, Charlene Duggs (Sharon Taggart), whom he does not love; she shares his indifference, and they decide to call it quits.At Christmastime, Sonny stumbles into an affair with Ruth Popper (Leachman), the depressed, middle-aged wife of his high-school coach, Coach Popper (Bill Thurman). At the sad little town Christmas dance, Jacy is invited by unsavory Lester Marlow (Quaid) to a naked indoor pool party at the home of Bobby Sheen (Gary Brockette), a wealthy boy who seems to offer better prospects than Duane. Since Bobby is not interested in her as long as she is a virgin, she must get someone to have sex with her first.Duane and Sonny go on a road trip to Mexico  which happens entirely off-screen  and return to discover that Sam the Lion (Johnson), their mentor and father-figure in town, has died of a stroke, leaving a will that bequeaths the town's movie theater to the woman who ran the concession stand, the caf to its waitress, Genevieve (Brennan), and the pool hall to Sonny.Jacy invites Duane to a motel for sex, but he is unable to perform; it takes a second attempt to alter her virginity status. Having got what she wants from Duane, she breaks up with him by phone, and he eventually joins the Army. When Bobby elopes with another girl, Jacy is alone again, and out of boredom has sex with Abilene (Gulager), her mother's lover. When Jacy hears of Sonny's affair with Ruth, she sets her sights on him and Ruth gets nudged out very quickly. Sonny gets injured with a broken bottle in a fight with Duane, who still considers Jacy "his" girl. Jacy pretends to be impressed that Sonny would fight over her and suggests they elope. On their way to their honeymoon, they are stopped by an Oklahoma state trooper  apparently Jacy left a note telling her parents all about their plan. The couple is fetched back to Anarene by her father and mother in separate automobiles. On the trip back, Jacy's mother Lois (Burstyn) admits to Sonny she was Sam the Lion's erstwhile paramour and tells him he was much better off with Ruth Popper than with Jacy.Duane returns to town for a visit before shipping out for Korea. He and Sonny are among the meager group attending the final screening at Sam's old movie house, which is no longer a viable business. The next morning, after Sonny sees Duane off on the Trailways bus, young Billy (Sam Bottoms), another of the town's innocents protected over the years by Sam the Lion, is run over and killed as he sweeps the street. Sonny flees back to Ruth, whom he has been ignoring since Jacy stole him away months earlier. Her first reaction is to show her hurt and anger, then the two slip into a haunting, beatific calm in her familiar kitchen.Peter Bogdanovich was a 31-year-old stage actor, film essayist and critic with two small films  Targets (1968) (also known as Before I Die) and Voyage to the Planet of Prehistoric Women (1968)  to his directorial credit. One day while waiting in a cashier's line in a drugstore he happened to look at the rack of paperbacks and his eye fell on an interesting title, The Last Picture Show. The back of the book said it was "kids growing up in Texas," and Bogdanovich decided that it did not interest him and put it back. A few weeks later actor Sal Mineo handed Bogdanovich a copy of the book, "I always wanted to be in this," he said, "but I'm a little too old now," and recommended that Bogdanovich make it into a film. At the time Bogdanovich was married to Polly Platt and he asked her to read it, and her response was, "I don't know how you make it into a picture, but it's a good book."[3] Bogdanovich, McMurtry and some sources suggest[5] an uncredited Polly Platt went through the book and wrote a script that tells the story chronologically.Stephen Friedman was a lawyer with Columbia Pictures, but keen to break into film production and he had bought the film rights to the book, so Bogdanovich hired him as producer.[6]After discussing the film with Orson Welles, his houseguest at the time, Bogdanovich decided to shoot the film in black and white.[3]Larry McMurtry was born in the small North Texas town of Archer City. In writing about his hometown he renamed it "Thalia" and in order to film "Thalia" Bogdanovich went back to Archer City. But for the film he renamed it Anarene, a name chosen to provide correspondence to the cow-town of Abilene in Howard Hawks's Red River (1948).[7]After shooting the film, Bogdanovich went back to Los Angeles to edit the film on a Moviola. Bogdanovich has said[3] he edited the entire film himself, but refused to credit himself as editor, reasoning that director and co-writer was enough. When informed that the Motion Picture Editors Guild required an editor credit, he suggested Donn Cambern who had been editing another film, Drive, He Said (1971) in the next office and had helped Bogdanovich with some purchasing paperwork concerning the film's opticals.[3] Cambern disputes this, stating that Bogdanovich did do an edit of the film, which he screened for a selection of guests, including Jack Nicholson, Bob Rafelson and himself. The consensus was the film was going to be great but needed further editing to achieve its full potential. Bogdanovich invited Cambern to edit the film further, and Cambern made significant contributions to the film's final form.In 1973, largely because of the skinny-dipping party scene, the film was banned in Phoenix, Arizona when the city attorney notified a drive-in theater manager that the film violated a state obscenity statute. Eventually, a federal court decided that the film was not obscene.[8][9]The Last Picture Show won Academy Awards for Best Supporting Actor (Ben Johnson) and Best Supporting Actress (Cloris Leachman). It was also nominated in the categories for Best Supporting Actor (Jeff Bridges), Best Supporting Actress (Ellen Burstyn), Best Cinematography (Robert L. Surtees), Best Director (Peter Bogdanovich), Best Picture (Stephen J. Friedman), and Best Adapted Screenplay (Larry McMurtry and Peter Bogdanovich).In 1998, The Last Picture Show was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry. It also ranked number 19 on Entertainment Weekly's list of the 50 Best High School Movies.[10] In 2007, the film was ranked #95 on the American Film Institute's 10th Anniversary Edition of the 100 greatest American films of all time.In April 2011, The Last Picture Show was re-released in UK and Irish cinemas, distributed by Park Circus. Total Film magazine gave the film a five-star review, stating: "Peter Bogdanovich's desolate Texan drama is still as stunning now as it was in 1971."[11]Stephen King's novel Lisey's Story makes repeated references to The Last Picture Show as the main character Scott Landon frequently watches the film throughout the novel during flashbacks.The film was released by The Criterion Collection in November 2010 as part of their box set, America Lost and Found: The BBS Story. It included a high-definition digital transfer of Peter Bogdanovichs directors cut, two audio commentaries, one from 1991, featuring Bogdanovich and actors Cybill Shepherd, Randy Quaid, Cloris Leachman, and Frank Marshall; the other from 2009, featuring Bogdanovich The Last Picture Show: A Look Back, (1999) and Picture This (1990), documentaries about the making of the film, A Discussion with Filmmaker Peter Bogdanovich, a 2009 Q&A, screen tests and location footage, and excerpts from a 1972 television interview with director Franois Truffaut about the New Hollywood.[12]In 1992, Bogdanovich re-edited the film to create a "director's cut". This version restores seven minutes of footage that Bogdanovich trimmed from the 1971 release because Columbia imposed a firm 119-minute time limit on the film.[3] With this requirement removed in the 1990s, Bogdanovich used the 127-minute cut on laserdisc, VHS and DVD releases. The original 1971 cut is not currently available on home video, though it was released on VHS and laserdisc through Columbia Tristar home video.There are two substantial scenes restored in the director's cut. The first is a sex scene between Jacy and Abilene that plays in the poolhall after it has closed for the night; it precedes the exterior scene where he drops her off home and she says "Whoever would have thought this would happen?" The other major insertion is a scene that plays in Sam's caf, where Genevieve watches while an amiable Sonny and a revved-up Duane decide to take their road trip to Mexico; it precedes the exterior scene outside the poolhall when they tell Sam of their plans, the last time they will ever see him.Several shorter scenes were also restored. One comes between basketball practice in the gym and the exterior at The Rig-Wam drive-in; it has Jacy, Duane and Sonny riding along in her convertible (and being chased by an enthusiastic little dog), singing an uptempo rendition of the more solemn school song sung later at the football game. Another finds Sonny cruising the town streets in the pick-up, gazing longingly into Sam's poolhall, caf and theater, from which he has been banished. Finally, there is an exterior scene of the auto caravan on its way to the Senior Picnic; as it passes the fishing tank where he had fished with Sam and Billy, Sonny sheds a tear for his departed friend and his lost youth.Two scenes got slightly longer treatments: Ruth's and Sonny's return from the doctor, and the boys' returning Billy to Sam after his encounter with Jemmie Sue  both had added dialogue. Also, a number of individual shots were put back in, most notably a handsome Gregg Toland-style deep focus shot in front of the Royal Theatre as everyone gets in their cars.[3]Texasville is the 1990 sequel to The Last Picture Show, based on McMurtry's 1987 novel of the same name, also directed by Bogdanovich, from his own screenplay, without McMurtry this time. The film reunites actors Jeff Bridges, Cybill Shepherd, Timothy Bottoms, Cloris Leachman, Eileen Brennan, Randy Quaid, Sharon Ullrick (ne Taggart) and Barc Doyle.October 22, 1971(1971-10-22)1 Plot2 Casting3 Production4 Reception

4.1 Home media

4.1 Home media5 Director's cut6 Sequel7 References8 External links4.1 Home mediaBen Johnson as Sam the Lion, the owner of the town's caf, movie theater, and pool hall. According to Bogdanovich, Tex Ritter was almost cast in the role (he was introduced to Bogdanovich by John Ritter, who was being considered for the part of Sonny). Johnson was not keen on the part because of the wordiness of the script; Eileen Brennan recalled that he hated to talk, saying he would rather ride his horse a "thousand miles than say any of these goddamn words." But Bogdanovich had his heart set on Johnson. He called director John Ford, whom he knew well, having previously completed a documentary on him, and Ford persuaded Johnson into the role by asking him "Do you want to be the Duke's sidekick forever?"[2] Johnson continued to find reasons not to do the film, and finally Bogdanovich told him, "You, in this role, are going to get an Academy Award," and finally Johnson accepted, "All right, I'll do the damn thing."[3] Johnson did indeed win the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.Jeff Bridges as Duane Jackson, one of the popular kids in the school, who dates Jacy at the beginning of the picture. Bridges got the role because in the book he is not a particularly likeable character; Bogdanovich thought that Bridges's naturally fun personality would give the character extra depth and warmth, and make him less disagreeable.[3]Timothy Bottoms as Sonny Crawford, Duane's buddy, who begins the picture with a girlfriend he does not like and ends up in an affair with Ruth. Bogdanovich liked Bottoms for his sad eyes, and recalled that he was convinced to cast him when he learned that he was being highly touted at the time by his agent who said he had been given the lead in a Dalton Trumbo movie Johnny Got His Gun (1971); "I guess that's what convinced me" he said.[3] Bottoms did indeed have the lead in Johnny Got His Gun, although he was playing a quadriplegic and terribly mutilated World War I soldier who could not see, hear, move or speak.Cybill Shepherd as Jacy Farrow, a pretty and popular girl who learns about life through her experiments with sexual attraction. Shepherd was a model whom Bogdanovich spotted on the cover of an issue of Glamour magazine (probably June 1970). "There was something about her expression that was very piquant," he later said. He arranged to meet her with her agent in a hotel in New York. She was, Bogdanovich says, interested in going through college and not particularly interested in being in movies, but she liked the script and thought it was an interesting part. She was playing with a rose on the table, and Bogdanovich kept expecting the rose to keel over and collapse; he recognised in that gesture the way Jacy Farrow plays with guys in the movie, and this convinced him that he had found Jacy. Bert Schneider, the producer, found a screen test Shepherd had done with Roger Vadim about a year before in which she was playing scenes from Cat on a Hot Tin Roof with no sound, and dancing silently to a Rolling Stones song. After filming had finished Bogdanovich admitted to Shepherd that the only time he ever doubted his decision was when he saw that screen test.[3] Shepherd went to Los Angeles and read with John Ritter, and with Robert Mitchum's son as well as Jeff Bridges and Timothy Bottoms. Bogdanovich was married to Polly Platt but began an affair with Shepherd during the filming.Cloris Leachman as Ruth Popper, Coach Popper's wife, who has a romantic affair with Sonny. Leachman wanted the role and Bogdanovich was impressed enough with her read-through to offer the part she wanted for a performance that ultimately earned her an Oscar.Ellen Burstyn as Lois Farrow, Jacy's mother, who romped with Sam in her younger days and has an off-and-on affair with Abilene. Burstyn was asked to read for the part of Genevieve, but she liked the part of Lois Farrow and asked if she could read for that and ended up reading for all three parts, including Coach Popper's wife. Bogdanovich thought she would be good as any one of them and decided he wanted her in the picture for any role she selected. She chose to be Jacy's mother because she thought the part interesting.[3]Eileen Brennan as Genevieve, the caf waitress, who inherits the caf after Sam dies. Bogdanovich had seen Brennan on the stage in Little Mary Sunshine in the 1960s and thought she had the perfect face for the tired waitress. When she read the script, Brennan thought it so powerful she wanted very much to be a part of the film and gladly accepted the role.[3]Randy Quaid as Lester Marlow, an unsavory character. Quaid was asked to read for the part of Bobby, the rich kid from Wichita Falls, but Bogdanovich thought he would be better as Marlow; it was Quaid's debut role.[3]Clu Gulager as Abilene, a man the same age as Sam, who sleeps with both Jacy and Lois. Bogdanovich's first choice was the country singer Jimmy Dean, but his producers did not like that idea; his next choice was Gulager, whom he had seen give a great performance in Don Siegel's The Killers (1964). Gulager played hitman Lee with what Bogdanovich described as, "good regional quality."[3]Bill Thurman as Coach Popper, the high school's athletic coach and Ruth Popper's husband; it is implied that he is homosexual, and he is confirmed as such in the director's commentary.Frank Marshall as Tommy Logan, a high school student. Marshall had been a production manager on Bogdanovich's earlier film, Targets, and they had such fun working together that Bogdanovich had promised him something on his next film. He came along as assistant production manager working with Polly Platt on location scouting and played a small part as the student who is smacked on the backside by Coach Popper during basketball practice. He shows up again later as a football player in a scene near the end.[3]Sam Bottoms as Billy the street-sweeper. Timothy Bottoms's younger brother Sam came along to stay with his brother for a few days as rehearsals started in Archer City. Seeing Sam sitting on some stairs, Bogdanovich asked him if he could act. Sam, who had appeared in productions of Santa Barbara Youth Theater since he was 10 years old, shrugged, and despite having previously cast the part to an actor from Dallas, Bogdanovich signed Sam up.[3][4]Sharon Taggart as Charlene Duggs, Sonny's dumpy, unpleasant girlfriend in the first act.The Last Picture Show at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Last Picture Show at AllRoviThe Last Picture Show at Box Office MojoThe Last Picture Show at Rotten TomatoesCriterion Collection Essay by Graham FullerCriterion Collection Essay by Danny PearyCriterion Collection Essay by J. HobermanThe Searchers is a 1956 American Western film directed by John Ford, based on the 1954 novel by Alan Le May, and set during the TexasIndian Wars. The film stars John Wayne as a middle-aged Civil War veteran who spends years looking for his abducted niece (Natalie Wood), along with Jeffrey Hunter as his adoptive nephew, who accompanies him.The film was a commercial success, although it received no major Academy Award nominations. It was named the Greatest American Western of all time by the American Film Institute in 2008, and it placed 12th on the American Film Institute's 2007 list of the 100 greatest American movies of all time.[1] Entertainment Weekly named it the best Western of all time.[2] The British Film Institute's Sight & Sound magazine ranked it as the seventh best movie of all time in a 2012 survey.[3]In 1868, Ethan Edwards (Wayne) returns from the American Civil War, in which he fought for the Confederacy, to the home of his brother Aaron (Walter Coy) in the wilderness of west Texas. Wrongdoing or legal trouble in Ethan's past is suggested by his three-year absence, a large quantity of gold coins in his possession, a Mexican revolutionary war medal that he gives to his young niece Debbie (played as a child by Natalie Wood's sister Lana Wood), and his refusal to take an oath of allegiance to the Texas Rangers, as well as Rev. Samuel Clayton mentioning that Ethan "fits a lot of descriptions".Shortly after Ethan's arrival, cattle belonging to his neighbor Lars Jorgensen (John Qualen) are stolen, and when Captain Samuel Clayton (Ward Bond) leads Ethan and a group of Rangers to follow the trail, they discover that the theft was a ploy by Comanche to draw the men away from their families. When they return home, they find the Edwards homestead in flames; Aaron, his wife Martha (Dorothy Jordan), and their son Ben (Robert Lyden) dead; and Debbie and her older sister Lucy (Pippa Scott) abducted.After a brief funeral, the men return to pursuing the Comanches. When they find their camp, Ethan recommends an open attack, in which the girls would be killed, but Clayton insists on sneaking in. The Rangers find the camp deserted, and when they continue their pursuit, the Indians almost catch them in a trap. The Rangers fend off the Indian attack, but with too few men to ensure victory, Clayton and the posse return home, leaving Ethan to continue his search for the girls with Lucy's fianc Brad Jorgensen (Harry Carey, Jr.) and Debbie's adopted brother Martin Pawley (Jeffrey Hunter). However, after Ethan finds Lucy brutally murdered and presumably raped in a canyon near the Comanche camp, Brad becomes enraged, rides wildly into the camp, and is killed.Ethan and Martin search until winter, when they lose the trail. When they return to the Jorgensen ranch, Martin is enthusiastically welcomed by the Jorgensens' daughter Laurie (Vera Miles), and Ethan finds a letter waiting for him from a man named Futterman, who has information about Debbie. Ethan, who would rather travel alone, leaves without Martin the next morning, but Laurie provides Martin with a horse to catch up. At Futterman's (Peter Mamakos) trading post, Ethan and Martin learn that Debbie has been taken by Scar (Henry Brandon), the chief of the Nawyecka band of Comanches. A year or more later, Laurie receives a letter from Martin describing the ongoing search. In reading the letter aloud, Laurie narrates the next few scenes, in which Ethan kills Futterman for trying to steal his money, Martin accidentally buys a Comanche wife, and the two men find part of Scar's tribe killed by soldiers.After looking for Debbie at a military fort, Ethan and Martin go to New Mexico, where a Mexican man leads them to Scar. They find Debbie, now an adolescent (Natalie Wood), living as one of Scar's wives. When she meets with the men outside the camp, she says she has become a Comanche and asks them to leave without her. However, Ethan would rather see her dead than living as an Indian. He tries to shoot her, but Martin shields her with his body and a Comanche shoots Ethan with an arrow. Ethan and Martin escape to safety, where Martin saves Ethan by tending to his wound. Martin is furious at Ethan for attempting to kill Debbie and wishes him dead. "That'll be the day," Ethan replies. The men then return home.Meanwhile, Charlie McCorry (Ken Curtis) has been courting Laurie in Martin's absence. Ethan and Martin arrive home just as Charlie and Laurie's wedding is about to begin. After a fistfight between Martin and Charlie, a nervous "Yankee" soldier, Lt. Greenhill (Patrick Wayne), arrives with news that Ethan's half-crazy friend Mose Harper (Hank Worden) knows where Scar is. Clayton leads his men to the Comanche camp, this time for a direct attack, but Martin is allowed to sneak in and rescue Debbie, who welcomes him. During the attack, Martin kills Scar and Ethan scalps him. When Ethan sees Debbie, Martin is unable to stop him from chasing her, but instead of killing her, Ethan carries her home. Once Debbie is safely with her family, and Martin is reunited with Laurie, Ethan walks away, alone, the cabin door closing on his receding image in one of the most famous and iconic closing scenes in film history.[4]The Searchers was the first production from "distinguished turfman"[5] C.V. Whitney; it was directed by John Ford, and distributed by Warner Brothers. While the film was primarily set in the staked plains (Llano Estacado) of Northwest Texas, it was actually filmed in Monument Valley, Arizona/Utah. Additional scenes were filmed in Mexican Hat, Utah, in Bronson Canyon in Griffith Park, Los Angeles, and in Alberta, Canada.[6] The film was shot in the VistaVision widescreen process. Ford originally wanted to cast Fess Parker, whose performance as Davy Crockett on television had helped spark a national craze, in the Jeffrey Hunter role, but Walt Disney, to whom Parker was under contract, refused to allow it, according to Parker's videotaped interview for the Archive of American Television. Parker notes that this was by far his single worst career reversal.[7]The Searchers is the first of only three films produced by Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney's C. V. Whitney Pictures; the second being The Missouri Traveler in 1958 with Brandon deWilde and Lee Marvin, the last being The Young Land in 1959 with Patrick Wayne and Dennis Hopper.Several film critics have suggested that The Searchers was inspired by the 1836 kidnapping of nine-year-old Cynthia Ann Parker by Comanche warriors who raided her family's home at Fort Parker, Texas.[8][9] She spent 24 years with the Comanches, married a war chief, and had three children (one of which was the famous Comanche Chief Quanah Parker), only to be rescued against her will by Texas Rangers. James W. Parker, Cynthia Ann's uncle, spent much of his life and fortune in what became an obsessive search for his niece, like Ethan Edwards in the film. In addition, the rescue of Cynthia Ann, during a Texas Ranger attack known as the Battle of Pease River, resembles the rescue of Debbie Edwards when the Texas Rangers attack Scar's village. Parker's story was only one of 64 real-life cases of 19th-century child abductions in Texas that author Alan Le May studied while researching the novel on which the film was based. Moreover, his surviving research notes indicate that the two characters who go in search of a missing girl were inspired by Brit Johnson, a black man who ransomed his captured wife and children from the Comanches in 1865.[10] Afterward, Johnson made at least three trips to Indian Territory and Kansas relentlessly searching for another kidnapped girl, Millie Durgan (or Durkin), until Kiowa raiders killed him in 1871.[11]In the 1868 report of the Indian Peace Commission an attack in 1866 on a rancher "James Box" in Texas is noted:[12]The testimony satisfies us that since October 1865, the Kiowas, Comanches, and Apaches have substantially complied with their treaty stipulations entered into at that time at the mouth of the Little Arkansas. The only flagrant violation we were able to discover consisted in the killing of James Box and the capture of his family in western Texas about the 15th of August 1866. The alleged excuse for this act is, that they supposed an attack on Texas people would be no violation of a treaty with the United States; that as we ourselves had been at war with the people of Texas, an act of hostility on their part would not be disagreeable to us.The ending of Le May's novel contrasts to the film's, with Debbie, called Dry-Grass-Hair by the Comanches, running from the white men and from the Indians. Marty, in one final leg of his search, finds her days later, only after she has fainted from exhaustion.In the film, Scar's Comanche group is referred to as the Nawyecka. The more common names for this Comanche division (with whom Cynthia Ann Parker lived) are Nokoni or Nocona. Some film critics[specify] have speculated that the historical model for the cavalry attack on a Comanche village, resulting in Look's death and the taking of Comanche prisoners to a military post, was the well-known Battle of Washita River, November 27, 1868, when Lt. Col. George Armstrong Custer's 7th U.S. Cavalry attacked Black Kettle's Cheyenne camp on the Washita River (near present day Cheyenne, Oklahoma). The sequence also resembles the 1872 Battle of the North Fork of the Red River, in which the 4th Cavalry captured 124 Comanche women and children and imprisoned them at Fort Concho.Upon the film's release, Bosley Crowther called it a "ripsnorting Western" (in spite of the "excessive language in its ads"); he credits Ford's "familiar corps of actors, writers, etc., [who help] to give the gusto to this film. From Frank S. Nugent, whose screenplay from the novel of Alan LeMay is a pungent thing, right on through the cast and technicians, it is the honest achievement of a well-knit team."[5] Crowther noted "two faults of minor moment":[5]Variety called it "handsomely mounted and in the tradition of Shane", yet "somewhat disappointing" due to its length and repetitiveness; "The John Ford directorial stamp is unmistakable. It concentrates on the characters and establishes a definite mood. It's not sufficient, however, to overcome many of the weaknesses of the story."[13]The film earned rentals of $4.8 million in the US and Canada during its first year of release.[14]In 1989, The Searchers was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the United States Library of Congress, and selected for preservation in its National Film Registry. The Searchers has been cited as one of the greatest films of all time, such as in a Sight and Sound poll of the greatest films ever made. In 1972, The Searchers was ranked 18th; in 1992, fifth; in 2002, 11th; in 2012, 7th. The 2007 American Film Institute 100 Greatest American Films list ranked The Searchers in 12th place. In 2008, the American Film Institute named The Searchers as the greatest Western of all time.[15] In 2010, Richard Corliss noted the film was "now widely regarded as the greatest western of the 1950s, the genre's greatest decade" and characterized it as a "darkly profound study of obsession, racism and heroic solitude."[16]The film has been recognized multiple times by the American Film Institute:The film has also been recognized by the critically acclaimed film-site "They Shoot Pictures Don't They" ... Top 100 Movies  No. 8Many critics maintain that Ethan Edwards is in love with his brother's wife Martha. In terms of the dramatic action of the film, it is by far the strongest initiator of behavior on the lead character's part. The most startling part of this plot undercurrent is that there is not one word of dialog alluding to the relationship and feelings between Ethan and Martha, despite the importance of those factors to the plot. Every reference to this relationship is visual.[17][18][19]In addition, the unspoken but true passion between Ethan and Martha leads to a possible conclusion: that Debbie, who is a mere eight years old when the film begins, may be Ethan's daughter. Ethan left at the dawn of the Civil War, eight years before, and his obsessive quest to find Debbie and his refusal to let her live as an Indian, along with his gift to her of his medal, might bespeak more than mere racism and revenge and his desire to save a niece; it might depict an absentee and guilt-ridden father's attempt to save the daughter he never raised and shamefully made by cuckolding his brother.[20]A major theme remains the examination of the issues of racism and genocide towards Native Americans. Ford's was not the first film to attempt this, but it was startling (particularly for later generations) in the harshness of its approach toward that racism. Ford's examination of racism starts with Edwards and his openly virulent hatred of Native Americans, opening the door for the film to examine racism as an excuse for the genocide of the Indians. Ebert says: "In The Searchers I think Ford was trying, imperfectly, even nervously, to depict racism that justified genocide."[21] However, Ford shows in several scenes that Ethan's racist hatred for the Indians is primarily motivated by the atrocities committed by them. Thus he is driven far more by an obsessive need for vengeance than pure unmotivated racism.[citation needed] Perhaps significantly, Ethan, despite his hatred of the Comanches, appears to be very learned in their language and culture. When Ethan finally encounters Scar, Ford indicates that Scar's cruelty too is motivated by revenge ("Two sons killed by white men. For each son, I take many... scalps.").[22]The theme of miscegenation also runs through this film. Early in the film Martin earns a sour look from Ethan when he admits to being part Cherokee. Ethan says repeatedly that he will kill his niece rather than have her live "with a buck", that "living with the Comanche ain't living". Even one of the film's gentler characters, Vera Miles's Laurie, tells Martin when he explains he must protect his adoptive sister, that "Ethan will put a bullet in her brain. I tell you Martha would want him to." This outburst made clear that even the supposedly gentler characters were thoroughly tainted by racism and the fear of miscegenation.[22] In a 1964 interview with Cosmopolitan magazine, Ford said:The Searchers has influenced many films. David Lean watched the film repeatedly while preparing for Lawrence of Arabia to help him get a sense of how to shoot a landscape.[23][unreliable source?] The entrance of Ethan Edwards in The Searchers, across a vast prairie, is echoed clearly in the across-the-desert entrance of Sherif Ali in Lawrence of Arabia. Sam Peckinpah referenced the aftermath of the massacre and the funeral scene in Major Dundee[24][unreliable source?] and, according to a 1974 review by Jay Cocks, Peckinpah's Bring Me the Head of Alfredo Garcia contains dialogue with "direct tributes to such classics as John Huston's The Treasure of the Sierra Madre and John Ford's The Searchers."[25]Martin Scorsese's Who's That Knocking at My Door features an extended sequence in which the two leading characters discuss the film.[26]Scott McGee, writing for Turner Classic Movies, notes "Steven Spielberg, Martin Scorsese, John Milius, Paul Schrader, Wim Wenders, Jean-Luc Godard, and George Lucas have all been influenced and paid some form of homage to The Searchers in their work."[27] Steven Spielberg's Saving Private Ryan pays a shot-specific homage to the famous doorway shot when the Army brings the news of the death of Private Ryan's three brothers to their mother.[citation needed] In Star Wars, the burning of Luke Skywalker's homestead is very similar in both context and composition to the burning of the Edwards' homestead in The Searchers.Alex Cox's Searchers 2.0, while not a sequel or a remake as the title may suggest, is named for the John Ford classic.[citation needed] The main characters discuss films, especially westerns, including The Searchers throughout the film."That'll Be the Day", a song written by Buddy Holly and Jerry Allison, and recorded by various artists, was inspired by their viewing of this film in June 1956.[citation needed] John Wayne's frequently used, world-weary catchphrase, "That'll be the day" inspired the young musicians. The film served as the inspiration for the name of the British band The Searchers.[28][29]John WayneJeffrey HunterVera MilesWard BondNatalie WoodMax Steiner (score)Stan Jones (title song)March 13, 1956(1956-03-13)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Historical background5 Reception6 Retrospective assessments7 Critical interpretations8 Influence9 See also10 References11 Bibliography12 External linksJohn Wayne as Ethan EdwardsJeffrey Hunter as Martin PawleyVera Miles as Laurie JorgensenWard Bond as Rev. Capt. Samuel Johnson ClaytonNatalie Wood as Debbie Edwards (older)John Qualen as Lars JorgensenOlive Carey as Mrs. JorgensenHenry Brandon as Chief Cicatriz (Scar)Ken Curtis as Charlie McCorryHarry Carey, Jr. as Brad JorgensenAntonio Moreno as Emilio FigueroaHank Worden as Mose HarperBeulah Archuletta as Wild Goose Flying in the Night Sky (Look)Walter Coy as Aaron EdwardsDorothy Jordan as Martha EdwardsPippa Scott as Lucy EdwardsPatrick Wayne as Lt. GreenhillLana Wood as Debbie Edwards (young)"Episode is piled upon episode, climax upon climax, and corpse upon corpse...[t]he justification for it is that it certainly conveys the lengthiness of the hunt, but it leaves one a mite exhausted, especially with the speed at which it goes."The director has permitted too many outdoor scenes to be set in the obviously synthetic surroundings of the studio stage...some of those campfire scenes could have been shot in a sporting-goods store window."AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies  No. 96AFI's 100 Years... 100 Heroes and Villains:

Ethan Edwards  Nominated Hero

Ethan Edwards  Nominated HeroAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"Let's go home, Debbie."  Nominated

"Let's go home, Debbie."  NominatedAFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  No. 12AFI's 10 Top 10  No. 1 Western FilmEthan Edwards  Nominated Hero"Let's go home, Debbie."  NominatedJohn Wayne filmographyThe Searchers: Screenplay, by Frank S Nugent, Alan Le May, John Ford. Published by Warner Bros, 1956. Online VersionPippin, Robert B. Hollywood Westerns and American Myth: The Importance of Howard Hawks and John Ford for Political Philosophy (Yale University Press, 2010) 208 pp.The Searchers at the Internet Movie DatabaseThe Searchers at the TCM Movie DatabaseThe Searchers at AllRoviDo the Right Thing is a 1989 American comedy-drama film produced, written, and directed by Spike Lee, who is also a featured actor in the film. Other members of the cast include Danny Aiello, Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee, Richard Edson, Giancarlo Esposito, Bill Nunn, and John Turturro. It is also notably the feature film debut of Martin Lawrence and Rosie Perez. The movie tells the story of a neighborhood's simmering racial tension, which comes to a head and culminates in tragedy on the hottest day of the summer.The film was a commercial success and received numerous accolades and awards, including an Academy Award nomination for Lee for Best Original Screenplay and one for Best Supporting Actor for Aiello's portrayal of Sal the pizzeria owner. It is often listed among the greatest films of all time.[3][4][5][6] In 1999, it was deemed to be "culturally significant" by the U.S. Library of Congress, and was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry, one of just five films to have this honor in their first year of eligibility.Mookie (Lee) is a young Black man living in a Black neighborhood in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn with his sister, Jade (Joie Lee), who wants him out of her apartment. He works delivering pizzas for a local pizzeria, but he lacks ambition and he works to support his girlfriend Tina (Perez) and their son Hector.Salvatore "Sal" Frangione (Aiello), the pizzerias Italian-American owner, has owned the restaurant and been in the neighborhood for twenty-five years. His older son, Giuseppe, better known as Pino (Turturro), "detests the place like a sickness", holds racial contempt for the neighborhood Blacks and attempts to make Mookie's life miserable. Sal's younger son, Vito (Edson), is friends with Mookie.The street corner is filled with distinct personalities, most of whom are just trying to find a way to deal with the intense heat on what is the hottest day in years and go about their regular day-to-day activities. A drunk called Da Mayor (Davis) is constantly trying to win both the approval and affection of the neighborhood matron, Mother Sister (Dee), who watches the neighborhood's activity from her brownstone. A young man named Radio Raheem (Nunn) lives for nothing else but to blast Public Enemy's "Fight the Power" on his boombox wherever he goes. He wears "love" and "hate" four-fingered rings (brass knuckles) on either hand, which he explains in one scene symbolize the struggle between the two forces.A mentally disabled man named Smiley (Smith) meanders around the neighborhood, holding up hand-colored pictures of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr. The local radio disc jockey, "Mister Seor Love Daddy" (Jackson) rounds out the neighborhood. Three men (Harris, Benjamin, Faison), known as "the Corner Men," act as a sort of Greek chorus, commenting on the neighborhood and the day's events. Four teenagers  Cee, Punchy, Ahmad and Ella  deal with the heat outside as well.While eating a slice at Sal's, Buggin' Out (Esposito) questions Sal about the "Wall of Fame" and demands he put up some pictures of Black celebrities on the wall, since, he explains, Sal's pizzeria is in a Black neighborhood and sells pizza to Black people. Sal replies that it is his store; he is proud of his Italian heritage and he doesn't have to feature anyone but Italians on his wall. Buggin' Out starts an argument with Sal, during which Sal threatens to "bash his head" with a baseball bat. Buggin' Out attempts to start a protest over the "Wall of Fame," but no one will support his protest except Radio Raheem and Smiley.Over the course of the day tensions rise around the neighborhood. Teenagers open a fire hydrant for respite from the heat, flooding a passer-by's car and police officers intervene. Radio Raheem "argues" with some Puerto Rican men simply by playing their radios loudly at each other. Buggin' Out instigates a fight with a white man who accidentally steps on his Air Jordan shoes, and Da Mayor saves a boy from being run over by a car. Sal argues with Radio Raheem for blasting his boombox in the pizzeria. Mookie and Pino begin arguing over which race is better, Blacks or Italians, which leads to a series of scenes in which the characters, addressing the camera, spew a variety of racial insults.In the afternoon, Pino and Sal talk about the neighborhood, Pino expressing his hatred and Sal insisting that, whether Pino likes it or not, his pizzeria, and his pizza, is part of the neighborhood there, and he isn't leaving. Then Sal watches, embarrassed, as Pino yells at Smiley outside. Mookie almosts gets fired by Sal, but Jade comes to Sal's shop, cooling Sal's anger. Outside, Mookie confronts her for being too close to Sal. As they're cleaning to close the restaurant Mookie demands his weekly pay from Sal. Buggin' Out convinces Radio Raheem and Smiley to join his protest and they begin insulting and threatening the yelling neighbors.That night, four teenagers arrive and Sal lets them in. After serving them, he closes. Suddenly, Radio Raheem, Smiley and Buggin' Out march into Sal's and demand that Sal change the pictures on the wall. Radio Raheem's boombox is blaring at the highest volume, and Sal demands that they turn the radio down or leave the shop, but the two men refuse to do so. They yell at each other, threatening, until Sal, in a fit of frustration and anger, calls Radio Raheem a "nigger," then snaps and destroys Radio Raheem's boombox with a baseball bat. Radio Raheem attacks Sal, starting a fight with all the teenage boys, Sal and his sons, which spills out onto the street, attracting a crowd of spectators. As Radio Raheem is strangling Sal to death, Da Mayor yells at them to stop the fight.The police arrive at the scene, break up the fight and begin to apprehend Radio Raheem and Buggin' Out. Buggin' Out is arrested while Radio Raheem is placed in a chokehold by one officer, killing him. The police officers begin yelling at an already dead Radio Raheem "to quit faking" and they kick him. The police officers, realizing they have killed a Black man in front of an angry crowd, take Radio Raheem's body back to the squad car, while in another squad car, a police officer beats Buggin' Out. The angry crowd chases the police, who leave the scene with Radio Raheem's body, and leave Sal, Vito and Pino alone with the angry crowd.Afterward, the large crowd of onlookers are enraged about Radio Raheem's death and blame Sal and his sons. A tense moment ensues when the crowd contemplates violence against Sal, Vito, and Pino. Da Mayor intervenes telling the crowd to go home, because someone will get hurt, and the crowd threatens Da Mayor. Mookie grabs a trash can and throws it through the window of Sal's restaurant, yelling "hate" which turns the collective anger towards the property and away from the owners. Da Mayor pulls Sal out of the mob's way. Vito, Pino and Sal watch in horror as the restaurant gets destroyed.The angry crowd becomes a riotous mob, rushes into the restaurant and destroys everything, while Smiley sets the restaurant on fire. From there, the mob begins to head for the Korean market. Sonny, the owner, tries to fight them off with a broom, yelling that he is one of them: "I no White! I Black! You, me, same! We same!" causing the mob to spare his store. Firefighters arrive and begin spraying Sal's building while the crowd yells Howard Beach as they are held back by riot patrol. The firefighters, after several warnings to the crowd, turn their hoses on the mob, further enraging them.Police officers begin struggling with the mob and some people are arrested. The mob attacks some of the firemen as they try to spray Sal's building. Da Mayor gets in the middle of the ensuing chaos and pulls a screaming Mother Sister out of the scene as Mookie and his sister watch the horror around them. Meanwhile, Smiley wanders back into the smoldering restaurant, past Radio Raheem's burning boombox, and as "Fight the Power" plays, he hangs a picture of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr. on what's left of Sal's "Wall of Fame."The next day, Radio Love Daddy discusses what transpired the previous night, asking, "are we ever going to live together?" After having an argument with Tina over what it is to be a man, Mookie returns to Sal, who feels betrayed by Mookie for destroying the restaurant. They get into an argument but then Mookie and Sal cautiously reconcile. He demands his weekly pay he had earlier been demanding to receive in advance, which he gets.Spike Lee wrote the screenplay in two weeks.[citation needed] The original script of Do the Right Thing ends with a stronger reconciliation between Mookie and Sal. Sal's comments to Mookie mirror Da Mayor's earlier comments in the film and hint at some common ground and perhaps Sal's understanding of why Mookie was motivated to destroy his restaurant. It is unclear why Lee changed the ending.[7]The film was shot entirely on Stuyvesant Avenue between Quincy and Lexington Ave in the Bed-Stuy neighborhood. The street's color scheme was heavily altered by the production designer, who used a great deal of red and orange paint in order to help convey the sense of a heatwave.Spike Lee campaigned for Robert De Niro as Sal the pizzeria owner, but De Niro had to decline due to prior commitments. The character of Smiley was not in the original script; he was created by Roger Guenveur Smith, who was pestering Spike Lee for a role in the film.[8] Four of the cast members were stand-up comedians  Martin Lawrence, Steve Park, Steve White and Robin Harris.The film was released to protests from many reviewers, and it was openly stated in several newspapers that the film could incite black audiences to riot.[9] No such riots occurred, and Lee criticized white reviewers for implying that black audiences were incapable of restraining themselves while watching a fictional motion picture.[10]One of many questions at the end of the film is whether Mookie "does the right thing" when he throws the garbage can through the window, thus inciting the riot that destroys Sal's pizzeria. Critics have seen Mookie's action both as an action that saves Sal's life, by redirecting the crowd's anger away from Sal to his property, and as an "irresponsible encouragement to enact violence".[11] The question is directly raised by the contradictory quotations that end the film, one advocating non-violence, the other advocating violent self-defense in response to oppression.[11]Spike Lee has remarked that he himself has only ever been asked by white viewers whether Mookie did the right thing; black viewers do not ask the question.[12] Lee believes the key point is that Mookie was angry at the death of Radio Raheem, and that viewers who question the riot's justification are implicitly valuing white property over the life of a black man.[10]In June 2006, Entertainment Weekly magazine placed Do the Right Thing at No. 22 on its list of The 25 Most Controversial Movies Ever.[13]The film contains several allusions to contemporary race-related violent acts.In the scene in which Mookie shows frustration with his sister for getting too close to Sal, "Tawana told the truth!" is spray painted on the bricks in the rear of this shot, referring to the 1987 Tawana Brawley rape allegations. Towards the end of the film, at the peak of the riot that ensues after Radio Raheem's death, the gathered characters yell the name of Eleanor Bumpurs and begin to chant "HOWARD BEACH! HOWARD BEACH!" referring to the 1986 Howard Beach incident.The killing of Radio Raheem is also an allusion to the alleged murder of Michael Stewart who died following an arrest by the New York City Police Department.The film holds a 96% "Certified Fresh" rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes. On Metacritic, the film has an average of 91/100, placing it as one of the top-rated films on the site.Both Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert ranked the film as the best of 1989 and later ranked it as one of the top 10 films of the decade (Siskel No. 6, Ebert #4).1990 Academy Awards1990 Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics1989 Cannes Film Festival1990 Chicago Film Critics Association Awards1990 Golden Globes1991 NAACP Image Awards1989 Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards1989 New York Film Critics Circle Awards2010 The 20/20 AwardsAFI's 100 Years 100 MoviesAdditional AFI titles include:National Film Preservation BoardMTV Movie AwardsThe film's score and soundtrack were both released in July 1989. The soundtrack was successful, reaching the number eleven spot on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, and peaking at sixty-eight on the Billboard 200.[15] On the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Tracks chart, the Perri track "Feel So Good" reached the fifty-first spot, while Public Enemy's "Fight the Power" reached number twenty, and Guy's "My Fantasy" went all the way to the top spot. "My Fantasy" also reached number six on the Hot Dance Music/Maxi-Singles Sales chart, and sixty-two on Billboard's Hot 100. "Fight the Power" also charted high on the Hot Dance Music chart, peaking at number three, and topped the Hot Rap Singles chart.[16][17]June 30, 1989(1989-06-30)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Controversies5 Political allusions6 Critical reception7 Awards and nominations8 Soundtrack

8.1 Score
8.2 Soundtrack

8.1 Score8.2 Soundtrack9 References10 External links8.1 Score8.2 SoundtrackSpike Lee as Mookie, a young black man working in Sal's Famous PizzaDanny Aiello as Sal, a surly Italian man who owns the pizzeriaOssie Davis as Da Mayor, an older black man who some call the town drunkRuby Dee as Mother Sister, an older black woman who observes the neighborhood goings-ons from the window of her brownstoneSteve Park as Sonny, a Korean grocery store owner across the street from Sal'sBill Nunn as Radio Raheem, a towering young black man who always carries around a huge boom box blasting only Public Enemy's "Fight the Power"Richard Edson as Vito, one of Sal's sons and a friend of Mookie'sGiancarlo Esposito as Buggin' Out, an excitable friend of Mookie's who "wants some brothers" on Sal's wall of fameJohn Turturro as Pino, another one of Sal's sons. He is a racist towards African Americans around the neighborhood including Mookie and not happy about being one of the last Italians in the neighborhood, nor about his brother's interracial friendshipRosie Perez as Tina, Mookie's girlfriend who also has a son by him named Hector.Paul Benjamin as MLFrankie Faison as Coconut SidRobin Harris as Sweet Dick WillieMiguel Sandoval as Officer Mark Ponte, a policemanRick Aiello as Officer Gary Long, a white policemanJoie Lee as Jade, Mookie's sisterSamuel L. Jackson as Mister Seor Love Daddy, the local DJRoger Guenveur Smith as Smiley, a young, mentally impaired man who tries to sell pictures of Malcolm X and Martin Luther King Jr.Steve White as AhmadMartin Lawrence as CeeLeonard L. Thomas as PunchyChrista Rivers as EllaLuis Antonio Ramos as StevieJohn Savage as CliftonFrank Vincent as CharlieRichard Parnell Habersham as EddieGinny Yang as Kim, Sonny's wifeNicholas Turturro (extra) (uncredited)Best Actor in a Supporting Role Danny Aiello (nominated)Best Writing, Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen Spike Lee (nominated)Grand Prix (nominated)Golden Palm Spike Lee (nominated)[14]Best Director Spike Lee (won)Best Picture (won)Best Supporting Actor Danny Aiello (won)Best Director (Motion Picture) Spike Lee (nominated)Best Motion Picture Drama (nominated)Best Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role in a Motion Picture Danny Aiello (nominated)Best Screenplay (Motion Picture) Spike Lee (nominated)Outstanding Lead Actress in a Motion Picture Ruby Dee (won)Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture Ossie Davis (won)Best Director Spike Lee (won)Best Music Bill Lee (won)Best Picture (won)Best Supporting Actor Danny Aiello (won)Best Cinematographer Ernest Dickerson (won)Best Picture (nominated)Best Director Spike Lee (won)Best Supporting Actor Danny Aiello (nominated)Best Supporting Actor John Turturro (nominated)Best Original Screenplay Spike Lee (nominated)Best Editing Barry Alexander Brown (won)Best Original Song Fight The Power Public Enemy (won)The American Film Institute from a poll of more than 1,500 artists and leaders in the American film industry voted it the 96th greatest film of all time in its 10th Anniversary Edition, 2007AFI' S 100 ...Cheers NominatedAFI'S 100... Thrills NominatedAFI'S 100 Years... 100 Movies NominatedAFI'S 100 Songs... Public Enemy Fight The Power No. 40National Film Registry (1999)The Bucket of Excellence (lifetime achievement award, 2006)Aftab, Kaleem. Spike Lee: That's My Story and I'm Sticking to It. England: Faber and Faber Limited, 2005. ISBN 0-393-06153-1.Spike Lee's Last Word. Documentary on the Criterion Collection DVD of Do the Right Thing. 2000.Spike Lee et al. Commentary on the Criterion Collection DVD of Do the Right Thing. 2000.Spike Lee; Lisa Jones (1989). Do the right thing: a Spike Lee joint. Simon and Schuster. ISBN978-0-671-68265-1. http://books.google.com/books?id=WyMoc4YZKl8C. Retrieved September 25, 2010.Mark A. Reid (1997). Spike Lee's Do the right thing. Cambridge University Press. ISBN978-0-521-55954-6. http://books.google.com/books?id=TyQdbk7CGtUC. Retrieved September 25, 2010.Do the Right Thing at AllRoviDo the Right Thing at Box Office MojoDo the Right Thing at the Criterion CollectionDo the Right Thing at the Internet Movie DatabaseDo the Right Thing at MetacriticDo the Right Thing at Rotten TomatoesDo the Right Thing at the TCM Movie DatabaseScript-O-Rama.com  The Do the Right Thing screenplay.Bringing Up Baby (1938) is an American screwball comedy film directed by Howard Hawks, starring Katharine Hepburn and Cary Grant, and released by RKO Radio Pictures.[1][2]The movie tells the story of a paleontologist winding up in various predicaments involving a woman with a unique sense of logic and a leopard named "Baby". The supporting cast includes Charles Ruggles, Barry Fitzgerald, Walter Catlett, and May Robson. The screenplay was adapted by Dudley Nichols and Hagar Wilde from a short story by Wilde that originally appeared in Collier's Weekly magazine on April 10, 1937.[3]Originally a disastrous flop upon its release, the film's appreciation has grown tremendously in the decades since. In 1990, Bringing Up Baby was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".David Huxley (Cary Grant) is a mild-mannered paleontologist beleaguered by problems. For the past four years, he has been trying to assemble the skeleton of a Brontosaurus but is missing one bone (the mythical "intercostal clavicle"[4]). To add to the stress, he is about to get married to the dour Alice Swallow (Virginia Walker) and must make a favorable impression upon Mrs. Random (May Robson), who is considering donating one million dollars to his museum.The day before his planned wedding, David meets Susan Vance (Katharine Hepburn) by chance on a golf course. She is a free-spirited young lady and, unknown to him at first, happens to be Mrs. Random's niece. Susan's brother Mark has sent her a tame leopard from Brazil[5] named "Baby", which she is supposed to give to her aunt. Susan believes David is a zoologist rather than a paleontologist, and she is very persistent in getting David to go to her country home in Connecticut to help her take care of Baby, which includes singing "I Can't Give You Anything But Love" which Baby likes. Complications arise as Susan decides that she has fallen in love with David, and she endeavors to keep him at her house for as long as possible to prevent him from marrying his colleague.While David is there, Susan's dog George (Asta) steals and buries the bone that David needs to complete his Brontosaurus skeleton. Susan's aunt, Mrs. Elizabeth Random arrives. She is unaware of who David really is because Susan has introduced him as a man named "Mr. Bone". Baby runs off, as does George. To further complicate matters, Susan and David mistake a decidedly wild and very dangerous leopard that has escaped from a nearby circus for Baby. They are jailed by a befuddled town constable, Constable Slocum (Walter Catlett) for breaking into the house of Dr. Fritz Lehman (Fritz Feld).[6] When Slocum does not believe their story, Susan tells him that they are members of "The Leopard Gang"; she refers to herself as "Swingin' Door Susie" and David as "Jerry the Nipper" (a name Cary Grant's character was called by Irene Dunne in the movie The Awful Truth, also featuring Asta). David fails to convince the constable that she is making everything up "from motion pictures she's seen."Eventually, Alexander Peabody (George Irving) shows up to verify everyone's identity, Susan, who has sneaked out of a window, unwittingly drags the highly irritated circus leopard into the jail. David has to save her, using a chair to shoo the animal into a jail cell.A few weeks later, Susan finds David, who has been jilted by Alice because of her, working on his brontosaurus reconstruction at the museum. After presenting him with his bone, which she finally found by trailing George, Susan informs David that she has gotten her aunt to donate the million dollars to the museum. Against his advice, she climbs a tall ladder beside the dinosaur to be closer to him. Although Susan climbs from the dangerously swaying ladder onto the skeleton and causes it to collapse, David finally gives up and admits he cannot do without her.[7]In March 1937 Howard Hawks signed a contract at RKO worked on an adaptation of Rudyard Kipling's Gunga Din, which he had been in pre-production on since the fall of 1936. When RKO was unable to get Clark Gable, Spencer Tracy and Franchot Tone on loan from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer for the film and Gunga Din was delayed, Hawks wanted to work on another film and began looking for new project. In April 1937 he had read a short story by Hagar Wilde in Collier's magazine called Bringing Up Baby and immediately wanted to make a film out of it.[8] RKO bought the screen rights in June[9] for $1,004 and Hawks briefly worked with Wilde on the film's treatment.[10] Wilde's original short story was significantly different than the film. In her story David and Susan are already engaged. David is not a scientist and there is no dinosaur, intercostal clavicle or museum. But Susan does get a pet panther from her brother Mark to give to their Aunt Elizabeth and David and Susan must capture the panther in the Connecticut wilderness with the help of baby's favorite song I Can't Give You Anything but Love, Baby. There is also a terrier named George.[9]Hawks then hired screenwriter Dudley Nichols, most famous for working with director John Ford, to work on the script. Hawks had decided that Wilde would develop the characters and comedic elements of the script, while Nichols would take care of the story and structure. Hawks worked with the two writers throughout the summer of 1937 and ended up with a 202 page script.[11] Wilde and Nichols wrote several drafts together and began a romantic relationship. They went on to co-write the Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers film Carefree a few months later.[9] The script went through several changes throughout its many drafts and at one point had an elaborate pie fight inspired by Mack Sennett films. At one point Major Applegate had an assistant and food taster named Ali that was meant to be played by Mischa Auer, but this was evenyually replaed by the character Gogarty. The scripts final draft also contained several scenes in the middle of the film where David and Susan express their love for each other, but Hawks cut these scenes during production.[12]The film was initially scheduled to begin filming on September 1, 1937 and wrap on October 31, but several factors delayed the film. Other than casting choices and script issues, production had to wait until mid-September to clear the rights to use I Can't Give You Anything but Love, Baby for $1,000. In August Hawks had hired gag writers Robert McGowan and Gertrude Purcell[13] to do some uncredited re-writes on the script. This resulted in McGowan adding a scene inspired by the comic strip Professor Dinglehoofer and his Dog in which a dog buries a rare dinosaur bone.[12] RKO paid King Features $1,000 to use the idea for the film on September 21.[14]After briefly considering his cousin Carole Lombard for the role of Susan Vance, Katharine Hepburn was chosen to play the wealthy New Englander because of her own background and similarities to the character. RKO agreed to the casting, but had reservations due to Hepburn's large salary and the fact that her films hadn't been successful at the box office for several years.[11] Producer Lou Lusty once said that "You couldn't even break even if a Hepburn show cost eight hundred grand."[14] For the role of David Huxley, Hawks was turned down by Ronald Colman, Robert Montgomery, Fredric March and Ray Milland before Cary Grant agreed to play the part. Grant had just finished shooting his first romantic comedy The Awful Truth[11] and Hawks may have seen a rough cut of the unreleased film.[14] Initially Grant was concerned about being able to play an intellectual character, but Hawks told him to play it like silent screen comedian Harold Lloyd and Grant felt more confident. Hawks got character actors Charlie Ruggles on loan from Paramount Pictures to play Major Horace Applegate and Barry Fitzgerald on loan from the The Mary Pickford Corporation to play the gardener Aloysius Gogarty.[11] Hawks cast Virginia Walker as Alice Swallow, David's fiance. Walker was under personal contract to Hawks and later married his brother William Hawks.[15] Hawks could not find a panther that would work for the film, so baby was changed to a leopard so that they could cast the trained leopard Nissa, who had been working in films for eight years and made several B-movies.[14]Shooting began on September 23, 1937 and was scheduled to end on November 20, 1937.[16] RKO gave Hawks a budget of $767,676.[17] Filming began in studio with the scenes in Susan's apartment and moved to the Bel Air Country Club in early October for the golf course scenes.[14] The production had a difficult start due to Hepburn struggling with both her character and her comedic abilities. Hepburn often overacted and tried too hard to be funny,[17] so Hawks asked vaudeville veteran Walter Catlett to help coach Hepburn. Catlett would act out scenes with Grant for Hepburn and show her how he was funnier when he acted serious. Hepburn then understood and simply acted naturally and played herself for the rest of the shoot. Hepburn was so impressed by Catlett's talent and coaching ability that on her insistence he was hired to play Constable Slocum in the film.[18][19]The bulk of the shooting was done at the Arthur Ranch in the San Francisco Valley, which was used as Aunt Elizabeth's estate for interior and exterior scenes during the day and at night.[14] Beginning at the Arthur Ranch shoot[20] Grant and Hepburn often ad-libbed their dialogue and production was often delayed due to the two stars ruining shots by making each other laugh.[21] The scene in which Grant is frantically asking Hepburn where his bone is was shot from 10 AM until well after 4 PM because of the two stars constant laughing fits.[22] The film had further delays and after one month of shooting Hawks was seven days behind schedule. During filming Hawks would reference four different versions of the film's script and make constant changes to scenes and dialogue.[20] Some of these delays were caused by Hawks' leisurely attitude on the set, and on several occasions Hawks shut down production so that the cast and crew could go see a horse race.[22] Hawks also took twelve days to shoot the scene in the Westlake jail after it was scheduled for five days.[23]Hawks later blamed the constant delays on his two stars' constant laughing fits and on having to work with two animal actors.[22] The terrier George was played by Skippy, most famous for playing Asta in The Thin Man film series (and co-starring with Grant as Mr. Smith in The Awful Truth). Both the leopard Baby and the leopard from the circus were played by the trained leopard Nissa. Nissa was watched over by its trainer Madame Olga Celeste, who was always standing by with a whip during shooting. At one point when Hepburn spun around and caused her skirt to abruptly twirl Nissa lunged at her but was subdued when Madame Celeste quickly cracked her whip. Hepburn also wore heavy perfume in order to keep Nissa calm. While Hepburn was unafraid of the leopard, Grant was terrified of Nissa and most scenes of the two interacting are done in close-ups with a stand-in. During the filming Hepburn threw a toy leopard through the roof of Grant's dressing room.[22]Hawks and Hepburn had a confrontation one day during the shooting. While Hepburn was chatting with a crew member, Hawks was yelling "Quiet!" until the only person still talking was Hepburn. When Hepburn paused in speech and realized that everyone was looking at her, she asked what was the matter and Hawks asked her if she was finished imitating a parrot. Hepburn took Hawks aside and told him never to talk to her like that again since she was old friends with most of the crew and technicians. When Hawks, who was an even older friend of all of the crew and technicians, asked a lighting tech who he'd rather drop a light on, Hawks won the argument and Hepburn agreed to behave herself on set. A variation of this scene with Grant yelling "Quiet!" was put into the film.[19][24]Filming was finally completed on January 6, 1938 with the scenes outside of Mr. Peabody's house[25] (and other shooting locations included the Westlake Street set at 20th Century Fox studios[13]). RKO producers had begun to be concerned about the film due to the delays, as well as not liking Grant's glasses or Hepburn's hair.[24] In total Bringing Up Baby was 40 days over schedule and $330,000 over budget. The film's final cost was $1,096,796.23, mostly due to clauses in Hawks', Grant's and Hepburn's contracts about overtime pay.[16] In total the film's budget for sets and props was only $5,000 over budget, while all actors, including Nissa and Skippy, were paid approximately double their initial salaries. Hepburn's salary went from $72,500 to $121,680.50, Grant's salary went from $75,000 to $123,437.50 and Hawks' salary went from $88,046.25 to $202,500. Hawks was eventually paid an additional $40,000 to terminate his RKO contract on March 21, 1938.[26]Hawks' editor George Hively had been cutting the film during production, and the final prints were made just a few days after the last day of shooting.[16] The first cut of the film was 10,150 feet long.[25] This version was sent to the Hayes Office in mid-January.[27] Despite several instances of double entendre and sexual references, the Hayes Office passed the film[16] and did not notice or recognize such lines of dialogue as Grant saying that he "went gay" or Hepburn making a reference to George urinating. The only objections that they did have were the scene where Hepburn's dress is torn and references to politicians such as Al Smith and Jim Farley.[27]By February 18, the film had been cut down to 9,204 feet.[27] The film had two advance previews in January 1938, where it received either A's or A+'s from audience feedback cards. However producer Pandro S. Berman wanted to cut five more minutes, but relented when Hawks, Grant and Cliff Reid all disagreed.[27] At the film's second preview, the film once again got rave reviews and RKO expected a hit film.[16] The film's musical score is minimal and mostly consists of Grant and Hepburn singing I Can't Give You Anything But Love, Baby. Other music includes incidental music in the scene at the Ritz and an arrangement of I Can't Give You Anything But Love, Baby during the beginning and ending credits by the film's musical director Roy Webb.[28]The film received good advance reviews and RKO was expecting a hit film. Otis Ferguson of The New Republic said that the film was very funny and praised Hawks' direction.[29] In a Variety review "Wear" praised the film, singling out Hawks' pacing and comedy direction, calling Hepburn's performance "one of her most invigorating screen characterizations" and stating that Grant "performs his role to the hilt."[30] Variety's only criticism was that the jail scene was too long.[31] Frank S. Nugent of the New York Times disliked the film and felt that it was unoriginal and full of comedy cliches. He also called Hepburn's performance "breathless, senseless and terribly, terribly fatiguing."[32]Despite having a reputation of being an enormous flop, it was actually very successful in certain parts of the country. It first premiered on Valentine's Day, February 14, 1938 at the Golden Gate Theater in San Francisco, where it was a hit. It was also a hit in such cities as Los Angeles, Portland, Denver, Cincinnati and Washington D. C. However it was a financial disappointment in the midwest and most other cities in the U.S. To the surprise of RKO, when it premiered in New York on March 3, 1938 at Radio City Music Hall it only made $70,000 and was pulled after only one week[33] to make way for Jezebel starring Bette Davis.[34] On its initial run the film recorded a loss of $365,000[35] if Hawks' additional fee of $40,000 it added to the film's budget.On its first run Bringing Up Baby made $715,000 in the U.S. and $394,000 in foreign markets, with a total of $1,109,000.[26] When it was re-issued in 1940 and 1941 it made an additional $95,000 domestically and $55,000 in foreign markets.[33] After its second run the film had made of profit of $163,000.[26] Due to the film's perceived failure, Hawks was released early from his two-film contract with RKO[36] and Gunga Din was eventually directed by George Stevens.[37] Hawks later stated that the film "had a great fault and I learned an awful lot from that. There were no normal people in it. Everyone you met was a screwball and since that time I learned my lesson and don't intend ever again to make everybody crazy."[38] Hawks went on to work with RKO on three films in the next decade.[39] Shortly after the film's release Hepburn was named "box office poison" by a group of US movie theater owners[33][40] and was released from her RKO contract.[41] However many film critics marveled at her new skill with low comedy, and Life magazine called her "the surprise of the picture."[42] Howard Hughes bought RKO in 1941 and later sold it in 1959. When he sold the company he kept the copyrights to six films, including Bringing Up Baby. Hughes and Hepburn were in a romantic relationship during the making of the film.[39]Since its release, the popularity of Bringing Up Baby has grown considerably, beginning with it being shown on TV in the 1950s. By the 1960s many film theorists, such as writers at Cahiers du Cinema in France, held the film in high esteem. In 1972 Peter Bogdanovich partially re-made the film as What's Up, Doc?, which contributed to Bringing Up Baby's growing reputation.[38] The film was placed by the American Film Institute on its list of the 100 greatest American films of all time. It was also named the fourteenth funniest American film of all time.Bringing Up Baby was the second of four films starring Grant and Hepburn, the others being Sylvia Scarlett (1935), Holiday (1938), and The Philadelphia Story (1940), the last three of which belong to a sub-genre of screwball comedy called the comedy of remarriage described by the philosopher Stanley Cavell as Hollywood's crowning achievement. Cavell also said that it was made in the tradition of romantic comedy with roots from ancient Rome to Shakespeare.[43]In 1990, Bringing Up Baby was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant", the second year that the registry started preserving films. Entertainment Weekly voted the film number twenty-four on its list of the greatest films. In 2000, readers of Total Film magazine voted it the forty-seventh greatest comedy film of all time.Premiere ranked Cary Grant's performance as Dr. David Huxley #68 on their list of The 100 Greatest Performances of All Time.[44] They also ranked the character of Susan Vance #21 on their list of The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time.[45]American Film Institute recognitionBringing Up Baby has been adapted several different times. Hawks himself recycled the nightclub scene in which Hepburn's dress is torn and Grant walks behind her in his 1964 comedy Man's Favorite Sport. Peter Bogdanovich's 1972 film What's Up, Doc?, starring Barbra Streisand, was intended as an homage to the movie. In his commentary track for Bringing Up Baby, Bogdanovich discusses how the coat ripping scene in What's Up, Doc? was based directly on the scene in which Grant's coat (and then Hepburn's dress) is torn in Baby. The 1987 movie Who's That Girl?, starring Madonna, is also loosely based on Bringing Up Baby.It is debated whether Bringing Up Baby is the first work of fiction, aside from pornography, to use the word "gay" in a homosexual context.[46][47] In the scene in question, Cary Grant's character is wearing a woman's marabou-trimmed nglige, and when asked why replies, in an exasperated tone, "Because I just went gay all of a sudden!", leaping into the air on the word "gay". It is not certain whether the word is being used in its older sense of "happy", or whether it was intentionally a joking reference to homosexuality.According to Robert Chapman's The Dictionary of American Slang, the adjective "gay" was used by homosexuals, among themselves, in this sense since at least 1920. Donald Webster Cory writes in The Homosexual in America (1951) that "Psychoanalysts have informed me that their homosexual patients were calling themselves gay in the nineteen-twenties, and certainly by the nineteen-thirties it was the most common word in use by homosexuals themselves." It was not, however, in common usage. Cory continues that it was such an insiders' term that "an advertisement for a roommate can actually ask for a gay youth, but could not possibly call for a homosexual."[48][49] The term "gay" did not become widely familiar to the general public until the Stonewall riots in 1969.[50]In the film, the word "gay" was an ad-lib by Grant and was not in any version of the original script.[20] According to Vito Russo in the book The Celluloid Closet (1981, revised 1987), the script originally had Grant's character say "I... I suppose you think it's odd, my wearing this. I realize it looks odd... I don't usually... I mean, I don't own one of these." Russo suggests that this indicates that people in Hollywood, at least in Grant's circles, were already familiar with the slang connotations of the word. However, neither Grant himself nor anyone involved in the film ever suggested this.[50]February 18, 1938(1938-02-18)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production

3.1 Development and writing
3.2 Casting
3.3 Filming
3.4 Post-production and previews

3.1 Development and writing3.2 Casting3.3 Filming3.4 Post-production and previews4 Reception and legacy5 Awards and honors6 Adaptations7 Use of word "gay"8 References9 External links3.1 Development and writing3.2 Casting3.3 Filming3.4 Post-production and previewsKatharine Hepburn as Susan VanceCary Grant as Dr. David Huxley (alias Mr. Bone)Charles Ruggles as Maj. Horace Applegate, a big game hunterWalter Catlett as Constable SlocumBarry Fitzgerald as Aloysius Gogarty, Elizabeth Random's gardenerMay Robson as Elizabeth Random, Susan's auntFritz Feld as Dr. Fritz LehmanLeona Roberts as Mrs. Hannah Gogarty, wife of AloysiusGeorge Irving as Dr. Alexander Peabody, Mrs. Random's lawyerTala Birell as Mrs. Lehman, Dr. Lehman's wifeVirginia Walker as Alice Swallow, David's fianceJohn Kelly as ElmerSkippy as George, a dogNissa as both Baby and the circus leopardWard Bond as Motorcycle cop at jail (uncredited)Jack Carson as Circus roustabout (uncredited)AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - #97AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs - #14AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions - #51AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"It isn't that I don't like you, Susan, because after all, in moments of quiet, I'm strangely drawn toward you; but, well, there haven't been any quiet moments!" - Nominated

"It isn't that I don't like you, Susan, because after all, in moments of quiet, I'm strangely drawn toward you; but, well, there haven't been any quiet moments!" - NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #88AFI's 10 Top 10 - Nominated Romantic Comedy"It isn't that I don't like you, Susan, because after all, in moments of quiet, I'm strangely drawn toward you; but, well, there haven't been any quiet moments!" - NominatedBringing Up Baby at the Internet Movie DatabaseBringing Up Baby at AllRoviBringing Up Baby at the TCM Movie DatabasePauline Kael analysisBringing Up Baby at moviedivaReprints of historic reviews, photo gallery at CaryGrant.netBringing Up Baby on Theater of Romance: July 24, 1945Blade Runner is a 1982 American dystopian science fiction action film directed by Ridley Scott and starring Harrison Ford, Rutger Hauer, and Sean Young. The screenplay, written by Hampton Fancher and David Peoples, is loosely based on the novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? by Philip K. Dick.The film depicts a dystopian Los Angeles in November 2019 in which genetically engineered organic robots called replicantsvisually indistinguishable from adult humansare manufactured by the powerful Tyrell Corporation as well as by other "megamanufacturers" around the world. Their use on Earth is banned and replicants are exclusively used for dangerous, menial or leisure work on off-world colonies. Replicants who defy the ban and return to Earth are hunted down and "retired" by police special operatives known as "Blade Runners". The plot focuses on a brutal and cunning group of recently escaped replicants hiding in Los Angeles and the burnt out expert Blade Runner, Rick Deckard (Harrison Ford), who reluctantly agrees to take on one more assignment to hunt them down.Blade Runner initially polarized critics: some were displeased with the pacing, while others enjoyed its thematic complexity. The film performed poorly in North American theaters but has since become a cult film.[2] The film has been hailed for its production design, depicting a "retrofitted" future,[3] and remains a leading example of the neo-noir genre.[4] It brought the work of Philip K. Dick to the attention of Hollywood and several later films were based on his work.[5] Ridley Scott regards Blade Runner as "probably" his most complete and personal film.[6][7] In 1993 the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".Seven versions of the film have been shown for various markets as a result of controversial changes made by film executives. A rushed Director's Cut was released in 1992 after a strong response to workprint screenings. This, in conjunction with its popularity as a video rental, made it one of the first films released on DVD, resulting in a basic disc with mediocre video and audio quality.[8] In 2007 Warner Bros. released The Final Cut, a 25th anniversary digitally remastered version by Scott in selected theaters, and subsequently on DVD, HD DVD, and Blu-ray Disc.[9]In Los Angeles, November 2019, retired police officer Rick Deckard (Harrison Ford) is detained by officer Gaff (Edward James Olmos) and brought to meet with his former supervisor, Bryant (M. Emmet Walsh). Deckard, whose job as a "Blade Runner" was to track down bioengineered beings known as replicants and "retire" (colloquial term for the termination of replicants) them, is told by Bryant that several have escaped and come to Earth illegally. As Tyrell Corporation Nexus-6 models, they have only a four-year lifespan, and may have come to Earth to try to extend their lives.Deckard watches a video of another Blade Runner named Holden (Morgan Paull) administering a "Voight-Kampff" test designed to distinguish replicants from humans based on their empathic response to questions. The subject of the test, Leon (Brion James), shoots Holden. Bryant wants Deckard to return to work to retire Leon and three other replicantsRoy Batty (Rutger Hauer), Zhora (Joanna Cassidy) and Pris (Daryl Hannah). Deckard refuses, but after Bryant makes an overt threat, he reluctantly agrees.Sent to the Tyrell Corporation to ensure that the test works on Nexus-6 models, Deckard discovers that Tyrell's (Joe Turkel) assistant Rachael (Sean Young) is an experimental replicant who believes herself to be human; Rachael's consciousness has been enhanced with false memories to provide an "emotional cushion". As a result, a more extensive test is required to determine if she is a replicant.Trying to find a way to meet with Tyrell, Roy and Leon go to the eye-manufacturing laboratory of Chew (James Hong), forcing him to divulge the identity of J.F. Sebastian (William Sanderson), a gifted designer who works closely with Tyrell. Rachael visits Deckard at his apartment to prove her humanity by showing him a family photo. Dropping the photo to the floor, Rachael leaves in tears after Deckard tells her that her memories are only implants taken from a real person. Sent by Roy, Pris meets and gains the confidence of Sebastian at his apartment, where he lives with manufactured companions.While searching Leon's apartment, Deckard finds a photo of Zhora, and a synthetic snake scale that leads him to a strip club where Zhora works. Deckard retires Zhora, and shortly after is told by Bryant to add Rachael, who has disappeared from the Tyrell Corporation headquarters, to his list of retirements. Deckard spots Rachael in a crowd but is disarmed and attacked by Leon, who saw him kill Zhora. Rachael kills Leon using Deckard's gun, and the two return to Deckard's apartment, where he promises not to hunt her. Later they share an intimate moment; Rachael then tries to leave, but Deckard seduces her.Arriving at Sebastian's apartment, Roy tells Pris the others are dead. Sympathetic to their plight, Sebastian reveals that because of a genetic disorder that accelerates his aging, his life will also be cut short. Under a pretext, Sebastian and Roy gain entrance into Tyrell's secure penthouse, where Roy demands more life from his maker. Told that this has proved to be impossible, Roy confesses that he has done "questionable things". Tyrell dismisses Roy's guilt, praising Roy's advanced design and his accomplishments. Responding "Nothing the god of biomechanics wouldn't let you into heaven for", Roy kisses Tyrell, then kills him. Sebastian runs for the elevator followed by Roy, who rides the elevator down alone.Upon entering Sebastian's apartment, Deckard is ambushed by Pris, but manages to kill her just as Roy returns. Roy fights Deckard without using his full strength against him. Eventually Deckard is hanging from a rooftop. Just as he is about to fall, Roy saves him. His life ending, Roy delivers a monologue on how his memories are about to be lost and dies in front of Deckard, who watches silently. Gaff arrives and, referring to Rachael, shouts to Deckard "It's too bad she won't live, but then again, who does?" Deckard returns to his apartment to find Rachael alive and sleeping in his bed; as they leave, Deckard finds a small tin-foil unicorn, a calling card left by his origami-making partner Gaff. Depending on the version, Deckard and Rachael either leave the apartment block to an uncertain future, or drive through an idyllic pastoral landscape."Spinner" is the generic term for the fictional flying cars used in the film. A Spinner can be driven as a ground-based vehicle, and take off vertically, hover, and cruise using jet propulsion much like Vertical Take-Off and Landing (VTOL) aircraft. They are used extensively by the police to patrol and survey the population, and it is clear that despite restrictions wealthy people can acquire spinner licenses.[10] The vehicle was conceived and designed by Syd Mead who described the spinner as an "aerodyne"  a vehicle which directs air downward to create lift, though press kits for the film stated that the spinner was propelled by three engines: "conventional internal combustion, jet, and anti-gravity".[11] Mead's conceptual drawings were transformed into 25 working vehicles by automobile customizer Gene Winfield.[12] A Spinner is on permanent exhibit at the Science Fiction Museum and Hall of Fame in Seattle, Washington.[13]A very advanced form of lie detector that measures contractions of the iris muscle and the presence of invisible airborne particles emitted from the body. The bellows were designed for the latter function and give the machine the menacing air of a sinister insect. The VK is used primarily by Blade Runners to determine if a suspect is truly human by measuring the degree of his empathic response through carefully worded questions and statements.The Voight-Kampff machine (or device) is a fictional interrogation tool, originating in the book where it is spelled Voigt-Kampff. The Voight-Kampff is a polygraph-like machine used by Blade Runners to assist in the testing of an individual to determine if they are a replicant. It measures bodily functions such as respiration, "blush response", heart rate, and eye movement in response to emotionally provocative questions.[14] In the film two replicants take the test, Leon and Rachael, and Deckard tells Tyrell that it usually takes 20 to 30 cross-referenced questions to distinguish a replicant; in contrast with the book, where it is stated it only takes "six or seven" questions to make a determination. In the film it takes more than one hundred questions to determine if Rachael is a replicant.Casting the film proved troublesome, particularly for the lead role of Deckard. Screenwriter Hampton Fancher envisioned Robert Mitchum as Deckard and wrote the character's dialogue with Mitchum in mind.[15] Director Ridley Scott and the film's producers "spent months" meeting and discussing the role with Dustin Hoffman, who eventually departed over differences in vision.[15] Harrison Ford was ultimately chosen for several reasons, including his performance in the Star Wars films, Ford's interest in the story of Blade Runner, and discussions with Steven Spielberg who was finishing Raiders of the Lost Ark at the time and strongly praised Ford's work in the film.[15] According to production documents, a long list of actors was considered for the role, including Gene Hackman, Sean Connery, Jack Nicholson, Paul Newman, Clint Eastwood, Tommy Lee Jones, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Al Pacino, and Burt Reynolds.[15]Coming off the success of Star Wars (1977), The Empire Strikes Back (1980) and Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981), Ford was looking for a role with dramatic depth. After Steven Spielberg praised Ford, he was hired for Blade Runner. In 1992, Ford revealed, "Blade Runner is not one of my favorite films. I tangled with Ridley."[16] Apart from friction with the director, Ford also disliked the voiceovers: "When we started shooting it had been tacitly agreed that the version of the film that we had agreed upon was the version without voiceover narration. It was a f**king  [sic] nightmare. I thought that the film had worked without the narration. But now I was stuck re-creating that narration. And I was obliged to do the voiceovers for people that did not represent the director's interests."[17] "I went kicking and screaming to the studio to record it."[18]In 2006 Scott was asked "Who's the biggest pain in the arse you've ever worked with?", he replied: "It's got to be Harrison... he'll forgive me because now I get on with him. Now he's become charming. But he knows a lot, that's the problem. When we worked together it was my first film up and I was the new kid on the block. But we made a good movie."[19] Ford said of Scott in 2000: "I admire his work. We had a bad patch there, and I'm over it."[20] In 2006 Ford reflected on the production of the film saying: "What I remember more than anything else when I see Blade Runner is not the 50 nights of shooting in the rain, but the voiceover... I was still obliged to work for these clowns that came in writing one bad voiceover after another."[21] Ridley Scott confirmed in the summer 2007 issue of Total Film that Harrison Ford contributed to the Blade Runner Special Edition DVD, having already done his interviews. "Harrison's fully on board", said Scott.[22]The film also used a number of then lesser-known actors such as Daryl Hannah and Sean Young.[23] Casting their roles of Pris and Rachael was also challenging, and a lengthy series of screen tests, with Morgan Paull playing the role of Deckard, were filmed with numerous actresses auditioning. Paull was cast as Deckard's fellow bounty hunter Holden based on his performances in the tests.[15] Among the actresses tested for the role of Rachael was Nina Axelrod, who was Paull's recommendation.[15] Stacey Nelkin tried out for Pris but was instead given another role in the film, which was ultimately cut before filming.[15] Both Axelrod's and Nelkin's screen tests are featured in the 2007 documentary Dangerous Days: Making Blade Runner. Young was picked to play Rachael, Tyrell's assistant, a replicant with memories that belonged to Tyrell's niece. Hannah played Pris, a "basic pleasure model" replicant, and the development of her relationship with Roy Batty is shown as a symbol of the replicants' underlying humanity.One role that was not difficult to cast was Rutger Hauer as Roy Batty, the violent yet thoughtful leader of the replicants.[24] Scott cast Hauer without having met him, based solely on Hauer's performances in other films Scott had seen.[15] Hauer's portrayal of Batty was regarded by Philip K. Dick as, "the perfect Battycold, Aryan, flawless".[25] Of the many films Hauer has done, Blade Runner is his favorite. As he explained in a live chat in 2001, "BLADE RUNNER needs no explanation. It just IZZ  [sic]. All of the best. There is nothing like it. To be part of a real MASTERPIECE which changed the world's thinking. It's awesome."[26]Edward James Olmos played Gaff and used his diverse ethnic background, and some in-depth personal research, to help create the fictional "Cityspeak" language his character uses in the film.[27] His initial addresses to Deckard at the noodle bar is partly in Hungarian and means, "Horse dick! No way. You are the Blade ... Blade Runner."[27] M. Emmet Walsh played the role of Captain Bryant, a hard-drinking, sleazy, and underhanded police veteran typical of the film noir genre. Joe Turkel was Dr. Eldon Tyrell, a corporate mogul who built an empire on genetically manipulated humanoid slaves. William Sanderson was cast as J. F. Sebastian, a quiet and lonely genius who provides a compassionate yet compliant portrait of humanity. J.F. sympathizes with the replicants, whom he sees as companions,[28] and shares their shorter lifespan because he has "Methuselah Syndrome", a genetic disease resembling progeria that causes faster aging.[29] Joe Pantoliano was considered for the role.[30]Brion James played Leon Kowalski, a replicant masquerading as a waste disposal engineer; he shoots a Blade Runner to escape, establishing the physical threat the replicants pose to their would-be captors. Joanna Cassidy was a special-ops, undercover and assassin replicant model called Zhora. Cassidy portrays a strong female who has seen the worst humanity has to offer. Morgan Paull plays Holden, the Blade Runner initially assigned to the case. James Hong as Hannibal Chew, an elderly Asian geneticist specializing in synthetic eyes. Hy Pyke conveyed the sleazy bar owner Taffey Lewis with ease and in a single take, something almost unheard-of with Scott whose drive for perfection resulted at times in double-digit takes.[31] Interest in adapting Philip K. Dick's novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? developed shortly after its 1968 publication. Director Martin Scorsese was interested in filming the novel, but never optioned it.[32] Producer Herb Jaffe optioned it in the early 1970s, but Dick was unimpressed with the screenplay written by Herb's son Robert: "Jaffe's screenplay was so terribly done... Robert flew down to Santa Ana to speak with me about the project. And the first thing I said to him when he got off the plane was, 'Shall I beat you up here at the airport, or shall I beat you up back at my apartment?' "[33]The screenplay by Hampton Fancher was optioned in 1977.[34] Producer Michael Deeley became interested in Fancher's draft and convinced director Ridley Scott to film it. Scott had previously declined the project, but after leaving the slow production of Dune, wanted a faster-paced project to take his mind off his older brother's recent death.[35] He joined the project on February 21, 1980, and managed to push up the promised Filmways financing from US$13million to $15million. Fancher's script focused more on environmental issues and less on issues of humanity and faith, which had featured heavily in the novel and Scott wanted changes. Fancher found a cinema treatment by William S. Burroughs for Alan E. Nourse's novel The Bladerunner (1974), entitled Blade Runner (a movie).[nb 1] Scott liked the name, so Deeley obtained the rights to the titles. Eventually he hired David Peoples to rewrite the script and Fancher left the job over the issue on December 21, 1980, although he later returned to contribute additional rewrites.[36]Having invested over $2.5million in pre-production,[37] as the date of commencement of principal photography neared, Filmways withdrew financial backing. In ten days Deeley had secured $21.5million in financing through a three-way deal between The Ladd Company (through Warner Bros.), the Hong Kong-based producer Sir Run Run Shaw, and Tandem Productions.[38]Philip K. Dick became concerned that no one had informed him about the film's production, which added to his distrust of Hollywood.[39] After Dick criticized an early version of Hampton Fancher's script in an article written for the Los Angeles Select TV Guide, the studio sent Dick the David Peoples rewrite.[40] Although Dick died shortly before the film's release, he was pleased with the rewritten script, and with a twenty minute special effects test reel that was screened for him when he was invited to the studio. Despite his well known skepticism of Hollywood in principle, Dick enthused to Ridley Scott that the world created for the film looked exactly as he had imagined it.[25] He said, "I saw a segment of Douglas Trumbull's special effects for Blade Runner on the KNBC-TV news. I recognized it immediately. It was my own interior world. They caught it perfectly." He also approved of the film's script, saying, "After I finished reading the screenplay, I got the novel out and looked through it. The two reinforce each other, so that someone who started with the novel would enjoy the movie and someone who started with the movie would enjoy the novel."[41] The motion picture was dedicated to Dick.[42]Blade Runner has numerous deep similarities to Fritz Lang's Metropolis, including a built-up urban environment, in which the wealthy literally live above the workers, dominated by a huge buildingthe Stadtkrone Tower in Metropolis and the Tyrell Building in Blade Runner. Special effects supervisor David Dryer used stills from Metropolis when lining up Blade Runner's miniature building shots.[43]Ridley Scott credits Edward Hopper's painting Nighthawks and the French science fiction comic magazine Mtal Hurlant ("Heavy Metal"), to which the artist Moebius contributed, as stylistic mood sources.[44] He also drew on the landscape of "Hong Kong on a very bad day",[45] and the industrial landscape of his one-time home in northeast England.[46] Scott hired Syd Mead as his concept artist who, like Scott, was influenced by Mtal Hurlant.[47] Moebius was offered the opportunity to assist in the pre-production of Blade Runner, but he declined so that he could work on Ren Laloux's animated film Les Matres du tempsa decision he later regretted.[48] Lawrence G. Paull (production designer) and David Snyder (art director) realized Scott's and Mead's sketches. Douglas Trumbull and Richard Yuricich supervised the special effects for the film. Principal photography of Blade Runner began on March 9, 1981, and ended four months later.[49]Although Blade Runner is ostensibly an action film, it operates on multiple dramatic and narrative levels. It is indebted to film noir conventions: the femme fatale; protagonist-narration (removed in later versions); dark and shadowy cinematography; and the questionable moral outlook of the heroin this case, extended to include reflections upon the nature of his own humanity.[50][51] It is a literate science fiction film, thematically enfolding the philosophy of religion and moral implications of human mastery of genetic engineering in the context of classical Greek drama and hubris.[52] It also draws on Biblical images, such as Noah's flood,[53] and literary sources, such as Frankenstein.[54] Linguistically, the theme of mortality is subtly reiterated in the chess game between Roy and Tyrell, based on the famous Immortal Game of 1851,[55] though Scott has said that was coincidental.[56]Blade Runner delves into the implications of technology on the environment and on society by reaching to the past, using literature, religious symbolism, classical dramatic themes, and film noir. This tension between past, present, and future is mirrored in the retrofitted future of Blade Runner, which is high-tech and gleaming in places but decayed and old elsewhere. Ridley Scott described the film as: "extremely dark, both literally and metaphorically, with an oddly masochistic feel", in an interview by Lynn Barber for The Observer (London) in 2002. Scott "liked the idea of exploring pain" in the wake of his brother's skin cancer death: "When he was ill, I used to go and visit him in London, and that was really traumatic for me."[7]An aura of paranoia suffuses the film: corporate power looms large; the police seem omnipresent; vehicle and warning lights probe into buildings; and the consequences of huge biomedical power over the individual are exploredespecially the consequences for replicants of their implanted memories. Control over the environment is depicted as taking place on a vast scale, hand in hand with the absence of any natural life, with artificial animals substituting for their extinct predecessors. This oppressive backdrop explains the frequently referenced migration of humans to extra-terrestrial ("off-world") colonies.[57] The dystopian themes explored in Blade Runner are an early example of cyberpunk concepts expanding into film. Eyes are a recurring motif, as are manipulated images, calling into question reality and our ability to accurately perceive and remember it.[58][59][60]These thematic elements provide an atmosphere of uncertainty for Blade Runner's central theme of examining humanity. In order to discover replicants, an empathy test is used, with a number of its questions focused on the treatment of animalsseemingly an essential indicator of someone's "humanity". The replicants appear to show compassion and concern for one another and are juxtaposed against human characters who lack empathy while the mass of humanity on the streets is cold and impersonal. The film goes so far as to put in doubt whether Deckard is human, and forces the audience to re-evaluate what it means to be human.[61]The question of whether Deckard is intended to be a human or a replicant has been an ongoing controversy since the film's release.[62] Both Michael Deeley and Harrison Ford wanted Deckard to be human while Hampton Fancher preferred ambiguity.[63] Ridley Scott has confirmed that in his vision Deckard is a replicant.[64][65] Deckard's unicorn dream sequence, inserted into the Director's Cut, coinciding with Gaff's parting gift of an origami unicorn is seen by many as showing that Deckard is a replicantas Gaff could have accessed Deckard's implanted memories.[54][66] The interpretation that Deckard is a replicant is challenged by others who believe the unicorn imagery shows that the characters, whether human or replicant, share the same dreams and recognize their affinity,[67] or that the absence of a decisive answer is crucial to the film's main theme.[68] The inherent ambiguity and uncertainty of the film, as well as its textual richness, have permitted viewers to see it from their own perspectives.[69]Blade Runner was released in 1,290 theaters on June 25, 1982. That date was chosen by producer Alan Ladd, Jr. because his previous highest-grossing films (Star Wars and Alien) had a similar opening date (May 25) in 1977 and 1979, making the date his "lucky day".[70] The gross for the opening weekend was a disappointing $6.15million.[71] A significant factor in the film's rather poor box office performance was that it was released around the same time as other science fiction films, including The Thing, Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan, and, most significantly, E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, which dominated box office revenues that summer.[72]Film critics were polarized as some felt the story had taken a back seat to special effects and that it was not the action/adventure the studio had advertised. Others acclaimed its complexity and predicted it would stand the test of time.[73]In the United States, a general criticism was its slow pacing that detracts from other strengths;[74] Sheila Benson from the Los Angeles Times called it "Blade Crawler", while Pat Berman in The State and Columbia Record described it as "science fiction pornography".[75] Pauline Kael noted that with its "extraordinary" congested-megalopolis sets, Blade Runner "has its own look, and a visionary sci-fi movie that has its own look can't be ignoredit has its place in film history" but "hasn't been thought out in human terms."[76] Roger Ebert praised the visuals of both the original Blade Runner and the Director's Cut versions and recommended it for that reason; however, he found the human story clichd and a little thin.[24] In 2007, upon release of The Final Cut, Ebert somewhat revised his original opinion of the film and added it to his list of Great Movies, while noting, "I have been assured that my problems in the past with Blade Runner represent a failure of my own taste and imagination, but if the film was perfect, why has Sir Ridley continued to tinker with it?"[77]Blade Runner has won and been nominated for the following awards:[78]Recognitions for Blade Runner include:While not initially a success with North American audiences, the film was popular internationally and became a cult film.[101] The film's dark style and futuristic designs have served as a benchmark and its influence can be seen in many subsequent science fiction films, anime, video games, and television programs.[50] For example, Ronald D. Moore and David Eick, the producers of the re-imagining of Battlestar Galactica, have both cited Blade Runner as one of the major influences for the show.[102] Blade Runner continues to reflect modern trends and concerns, and an increasing number consider it one of the greatest science fiction films of all time.[103] It was voted the best science fiction film ever made in a poll of 60 eminent world scientists conducted in 2004.[104] Blade Runner is also cited as an important influence to both the style and story of the Ghost in the Shell film series, which itself has been highly influential to the future-noir genre.[105][106]The film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry in 1993 and is frequently used in university courses.[107] In 2007 it was named the 2nd most visually influential film of all time by the Visual Effects Society.[108]Blade Runner is one of the most musically sampled films of the 20th century.[109] The 2009 album, I, Human, by Singaporean band Deus Ex Machina makes numerous references to the genetic engineering and cloning themes from the film, and even features a track entitled "Replicant".[110]Blade Runner has influenced adventure games such as; Rise of the Dragon,[111][112] Snatcher,[112][113] Beneath a Steel Sky,[114] Flashback: The Quest for Identity,[112] Bubblegum Crisis (and its original anime films),[115][116] the role-playing game Shadowrun,[112] the first-person shooter Perfect Dark,[117] and the Syndicate series of video games.[118][119] The film is also cited as a major influence on Warren Spector,[120] designer of the computer-game Deus Ex, which displays evidence of the film's influence in both its visual rendering and plot. The look of the film, darkness, neon lights and opacity of vision, is easier to render than complicated backdrops, making it a popular choice for game designers.[121][122]Blade Runner has also been the subject of parody, such as the comics Blade Bummer by Crazy comics,[123] Bad Rubber by Steve Gallacci,[124] and the Red Dwarf 2009 three-part miniseries, "Back to Earth".[125][126]Among the folklore that has developed around the film over the years has been the belief that the film was a curse to the companies whose logos were displayed prominently as product placements in some scenes.[127] While they were market leaders at the time, more than half experienced disastrous setbacks during the next decade. Atari dominated the home video game market when the film came out, but was losing money by the 1990s. Cuisinart and Pan Am went bankrupt in 1989 and 1991 respectively. The Bell System monopoly was broken up in the year of the film's release, although many of the Baby Bells have merged back with AT&T. The Coca-Cola Company suffered losses during its failed introduction of New Coke in 1985, but soon afterwards regained its market share.[55]Before the film's principal photography began, Cinefantastique magazine commissioned Paul M. Sammon to write an article about Blade Runner's production which became the book Future Noir: The Making of Blade Runner (referred to as the "Blade Runner Bible" by many of the film's fans).[128] The book chronicles the evolution of Blade Runner as a film and focuses on film-set politics, especially the British director's experiences with his first American film crew; of which producer Alan Ladd, Jr. has said, "Harrison wouldn't speak to Ridley and Ridley wouldn't speak to Harrison. By the end of the shoot Ford was 'ready to kill Ridley', said one colleague. He really would have taken him on if he hadn't been talked out of it."[129] Future Noir has short cast biographies and quotations about their experiences in making Blade Runner, as well as many photographs of the film's production and preliminary sketches. The cast chapter was deleted from the first edition, though it is available online. A second edition of Future Noir was published in 2007.[130]The Blade Runner soundtrack by Vangelis is a dark melodic combination of classic composition and futuristic synthesizers which mirrors the film-noir retro-future envisioned by Ridley Scott. Vangelis, fresh from his Academy Award winning score for Chariots of Fire,[131] composed and performed the music on his synthesizers.[132] He also made use of various chimes and the vocals of collaborator Demis Roussos.[133] Another memorable sound is the haunting tenor sax solo "Love Theme" by British saxophonist Dick Morrissey, who appeared on many of Vangelis' albums. Ridley Scott also used "Memories of Green" from Vangelis' album See You Later (an orchestral version of which Scott would later use in his film Someone to Watch Over Me).[134]Along with Vangelis' compositions and ambient textures, the film's sound scape also features a track by the Japanese ensemble Nipponia ("Ogi No Mato" or "The Folding Fan as a Target" from the Nonesuch Records release Traditional Vocal and Instrumental Music) and a track by harpist Gail Laughton ("Harps of the Ancient Temples" from Laurel Records).[135]Despite being well received by fans and critically acclaimed and nominated in 1983 for a BAFTA and Golden Globe as best original score, and the promise of a soundtrack album from Polydor Records in the end titles of the film, the release of the official soundtrack recording was delayed for over a decade. There are two official releases of the music from Blade Runner. In light of the lack of a release of an album, the New American Orchestra recorded an orchestral adaptation in 1982 which bore little resemblance to the original. Some of the film tracks would in 1989 surface on the compilation Vangelis: Themes, but not until the 1992 release of the Director's Cut version would a substantial amount of the film's score see commercial release.[133]These delays and poor reproductions led to the production of many bootleg recordings over the years. A bootleg tape surfaced in 1982 at science fiction conventions and became popular given the delay of an official release of the original recordings, and in 1993 "Off World Music, Ltd." created a bootleg CD that would prove more comprehensive than Vangelis' official CD in 1994.[133] A set with three CDs of Blade Runner-related Vangelis music was released in 2007. Titled Blade Runner Trilogy, the first CD contains the same tracks as the 1994 official soundtrack release, the second CD contains previously unreleased music from the movie, and the third CD is all newly composed music from Vangelis, inspired by, and in the spirit of the movie.[136]Seven different versions of Blade Runner have been shown. The original workprint version (1982, 113 minutes) was shown for audience test previews in Denver and Dallas in March 1982. Negative responses to the test previews led to the modifications resulting in the U.S. theatrical version.[137][138] The original version was also shown as a director's cut without Scott's approval at the Los Angeles Fairfax Theater in May 1990, at an AMPAS showing in April 1991, and in September and October 1991 at the Los Angeles NuArt Theater and the San Francisco Castro Theater.[139] Positive responses pushed the studio to approve work on an official director's cut.[140] It was re-released with the 5-disc Ultimate Edition in 2007.A San Diego Sneak Preview was shown only once, in May 1982, and was almost identical to the U.S. theatrical version but contained three extra scenes not shown in any other version, including the 2007 Final Cut.[141]The releases seen by most cinema audiences were: the U.S. theatrical version (1982, 116 minutes), known as the original version or Domestic Cut, released on Betamax and VHS in 1983 and Laserdisc in 1987; the International Cut (1982, 117 minutes), also known as the "Criterion Edition" or "uncut version", which included more violent action scenes than the U.S. version. Although initially unavailable in the U.S., and distributed in Europe and Asia via theatrical and local Warner Home Video Laserdisc releases, it was later released on VHS and Criterion Collection Laserdisc in North America, and re-released in 1992 as a "10th Anniversary Edition".[142]The U.S. broadcast version (1986, 114 minutes) was the U.S. theatrical version edited by CBS to tone down the violence, profanity, and nudity to meet broadcasting restrictions.[143]The Ridley Scott-approved (1991, 116 minutes) Director's Cut was prompted by the unauthorized 1990/1991 workprint theatrical release. This Director's Cut was made available on VHS and Laserdisc in 1993, and on DVD in 1997. Significant changes from the theatrical version include: the removal of Deckard's voice-over; re-insertion of a unicorn sequence; and removal of the studio-imposed happy ending. Scott provided extensive notes and consultation to Warner Bros. through film preservationist Michael Arick, who was put in charge of creating the Director's Cut.[144]Ridley Scott's The Final Cut (2007, 117 minutes), or the "25th Anniversary Edition", was released by Warner Bros. theatrically on October 5, 2007, and subsequently released on DVD, HD DVD, and Blu-ray Disc in December 2007.[9] This is the only version over which Ridley Scott had complete artistic control, as he was not directly in charge of the Director's Cut.[144] In conjunction with the Final Cut cinema release, extensive documentary and other materials were produced for the DVD releases which culminated in a five-disc "Ultimate Collector's Edition" release by Charles de Lauzirika.[8]Philip K. Dick refused an offer of $400,000 to write a novelization of the Blade Runner screenplay, saying: "[I was] told the cheapo novelization would have to appeal to the twelve-year-old audience" and "[it] would have probably been disastrous to me artistically." He added, "That insistence on my part of bringing out the original novel and not doing the novelizationthey were just furious. They finally recognized that there was a legitimate reason for reissuing the novel, even though it cost them money. It was a victory not just of contractual obligations but of theoretical principles."[41] Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? was eventually reprinted as a tie-in, with the film poster as a cover and the original title in parentheses below the Blade Runner title.[145]On the Edge of Blade Runner (2000, 55 minutes) was produced by Nobles Gate Ltd. (for Channel 4), directed by Andrew Abbott and hosted/written by Mark Kermode. Interviews with production staff, including Scott, give details of the creative process and the turmoil during preproduction. Stories from Paul M. Sammon and Hampton Fancher provide insight into Philip K. Dick and the origins of Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?[146]Interwoven are cast interviews (with the notable exceptions of Harrison Ford and Sean Young), which convey some of the difficulties of making the film (including an exacting director and humid, smoggy weather). There is also a tour of some locations, most notably the Bradbury Building and the Warner Bros. backlot that became the LA 2019 streets, which look very different from Scott's dark vision. The documentary then details the test screenings and the resulting changes (the voice over, the happy ending, and the deleted Holden hospital scene), the special effects, the soundtrack by Vangelis, and the unhappy relationship between the filmmakers and the investors which culminated in Deeley and Scott being fired but still working on the film. The question of whether or not Deckard is a replicant surfaces.[146]Future Shocks (2003, 27 minutes) is a documentary by TVOntario.[147] It includes interviews with executive producer Bud Yorkin, Syd Mead, and the cast, this time with Sean Young, but still without Harrison Ford. There is extensive commentary by science fiction author Robert J. Sawyer and from film critics, as the documentary focuses on the themes, visual impact and influence of the film. Edward James Olmos describes Ford's participation, and personal experiences during filming are related by Young, Walsh, Cassidy and Sanderson. They also relate a story about crew members creating T-shirts that took pot shots at Scott. The different versions of the film are critiqued and the accuracy of its predictions of the future are discussed.Dangerous Days: Making Blade Runner (2007, 183 minutes) is a documentary directed and produced by Charles de Lauzirika for The Final Cut version of the film. It appears with every edition of The Final Cut on DVD, HD DVD and Blu-ray Disc, except for the 2010 single-disc DVD and Blu-Ray editions. (It is a DVD format disc, even in the HD DVD and Blu-ray Disc editions). It was culled from over 80 interviews, including Harrison Ford, Sean Young, Rutger Hauer, Edward James Olmos, Jerry Perenchio, Bud Yorkin and Ridley Scott, and also contains several alternate and deleted shots within the context of the documentary itself.[148] The documentary consists of eight chapters, each covering a portion of the film-makingor in the case of the final chapter, the film's controversial legacy.[149]All Our Variant Futures: From Workprint to Final Cut (2007, 29 minutes), produced by Paul Prischman, appears on Disc 5 of the Blade Runner Ultimate Collector's Edition and provides an overview of the film's multiple versions and their origins, as well as detailing the seven year-long restoration, enhancement and remastering process behind The Final Cut. Included are interviews with director Ridley Scott, restoration producer Charles de Lauzirika, restoration consultant Kurt P. Galvao, restoration VFX supervisor John Scheele and Future Noir: The Making of Blade Runner author Paul M. Sammon. Behind-the-scenes footage documenting the restorationfrom archival work done in 2001 through the 2007 filming of Joanna Cassidy and Benjamin Ford for The Final Cut's digital fixesare seen throughout.[9] A variety of other supplemental featurettes produced and directed by Charles de Lauzirika are included on both the four- and five-disc collector's editions of Blade Runner released by Warner Home Video in 2007.[9]K. W. Jeter, a friend of Philip K. Dick, wrote three officially authorized Blade Runner novels that continue Deckard's story; attempting to resolve many of the differences between Blade Runner and Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?[150]By 1999, Stuart Hazeldine had written a proposed sequel to Blade Runner titled Blade Runner Down, which would have been based on Jeter's first sequel novel. The project was shelved due to rights issues.[151] Blade Runner co-author David Peoples wrote the 1998 action film Soldier, which was referred to by him as a "sidequel", or spiritual successor, to the original film.[152] The 1999 TV series Total Recall 2070, though with a milieu based loosely on off-world colony background of another Philip K. Dick-inspired film, focuses on replicants.Ridley Scott apparently toyed for years with the idea of a sequel film, possibly titled Metropolis.[151] At the 2007 Comic-Con Scott again announced that he was considering a sequel to the film.[153] Eagle Eye co-writer Travis Wright worked with producer Bud Yorke for a few years on the project. His colleague John Glenn, who left the project by 2008, stated the script explores the nature of the off-world colonies as well as what happens to the Tyrell Corporation in the wake of its founder's death.[154]In June 2009 The New York Times reported that Ridley Scott and his brother Tony Scott were working on a prequel to Blade Runner set at a point in time before 2019. The prequel, Purefold, was planned as a series of 510 minute shorts, aimed first at the web and then perhaps television. Due to rights issues the proposed series was not to be linked too closely to the characters or events of the 1982 film.[155] On February 7, 2010, it was announced that production on Purefold had ceased, due to funding problems.[156]On March 4, 2011, io9 reported that Bud Yorkin, the producer of Blade Runner, was developing a sequel or prequel to the film. It was not announced whether this was connected to Ridley Scott or any of the other original filmmakers.[157] It was also reported that month that Christopher Nolan, who has worked with Warner Bros. many times in the past, was wanted at the helm of any eventual prequel or sequel.[158]It was announced on August 18, 2011, that Ridley Scott was to be at the helm of a new Blade Runner movie, either a sequel or a prequel, with filming to begin no earlier than 2013 and a release for the following year. Indications from producer Andrew Kosove were that Harrison Ford was unlikely to be involved in the project.[159][160] Scott later said that the film was "liable to be a sequel" but without the previous cast, and that he was close to finding a writer that "might be able to help [him] deliver".[161] On February 6, 2012, Kosove denied that any casting considerations had been made in response to buzz that Ford might reprise his role, saying, "It is absolutely, patently false that there has been any discussion about Harrison Ford being in Blade Runner [2]. To be clear, what we are trying to do with Ridley now is go through the painstaking process of trying to break the back of the story... The casting of the movie could not be further from our minds at this moment."[162]When Scott was asked about the possibility of a Blade Runner sequel in October 2012, he said, "It's not a rumorit's happening. With Harrison Ford? I don't know yet. Is he too old? Well, he was a Nexus-6 so we don't know how long he can live. And that's all I'm going to say at this stage."[163]Archie Goodwin scripted the comic book adaptation, A Marvel Comics Super Special: Blade Runner, published in September 1982. The Jim Steranko cover leads into a 45-page adaptation illustrated by the team of Al Williamson, Carlos Garzon, Dan Green and Ralph Reese. This adaptation includes the narrative line, "Blade runner. You're always movin' on the edge".In 2009 BOOM! Studios published a 24-issue miniseries comic book adaptation of Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?, the Blade Runner source novel.[164] In April 2010 BOOM! Studios announced a follow-up comic Dust to Dust, written by Chris Roberson and drawn by Robert Adler, a four-issue miniseries which started production on May 26, 2010.[165]There are two video games based on the film, one for Commodore 64, Sinclair ZX Spectrum and Amstrad CPC (1985) by CRL Group PLC based on the music by Vangelis (due to licensing issues), and another action adventure PC game (1997) by Westwood Studios. The Westwood PC game featured new characters and branching storylines based on the Blade Runner world. Eldon Tyrell, Gaff, Leon, Rachael, Chew, and J.F. Sebastian are seen, and their voice files were recorded by the original actors. DNA Row, the Eye Works, the Police Headquarters, Howie Lee's, the Tyrell Corporation building, and J.F. Sebastian's hotel are faithfully replicated.[166] The events portrayed in the 1997 game occur not after, but in parallel to those in the film. The player assumes the role of McCoy, another replicant-hunter working at the same time as Deckard. Although Deckard is seen in photo evidence and referred to in dialogue,[166] Deckard and McCoy never meet.[121][122]The PC game featured a non-linear plot, non-player characters that each ran in their own independent AI, and an unusual pseudo-3D engine (which eschewed polygonal solids in favor of voxel elements) that did not require the use of a 3D accelerator card to play the game.[167]The television film Total Recall 2070 was initially planned as a spin-off of the movie Total Recall, and would eventually be transformed into a hybrid of Total Recall and Blade Runner.[168] The Total Recall film was also based on a Philip K. Dick story, "We Can Remember It for You Wholesale"; many similarities between Total Recall 2070 and Blade Runner were noted, as well as apparent inspiration from Isaac Asimov's The Caves of Steel and the TV series Holmes & Yo-Yo.[169]   Hampton FancherDavid PeoplesHarrison FordRutger HauerSean YoungEdward James OlmosTerry RawlingsMarsha NakashimaJune 25, 1982(1982-06-25)1 Plot2 Technology

2.1 Spinner
2.2 Voight-Kampff machine

2.1 Spinner2.2 Voight-Kampff machine3 Casting and characters 

3.1 Cast

3.1 Cast4 Production5 Interpretation6 Reception

6.1 Accolades
6.2 Lists of the best films

6.1 Accolades6.2 Lists of the best films7 Cultural influence

7.1 Blade Runner curse
7.2 Future Noir

7.1 Blade Runner curse7.2 Future Noir8 Soundtrack9 Versions10 Derivative works

10.1 Novelization
10.2 Documentaries
10.3 Possible follow-ups
10.4 Comics
10.5 Video games
10.6 Television series

10.1 Novelization10.2 Documentaries10.3 Possible follow-ups10.4 Comics10.5 Video games10.6 Television series11 References12 External links2.1 Spinner2.2 Voight-Kampff machine3.1 Cast6.1 Accolades6.2 Lists of the best films7.1 Blade Runner curse7.2 Future Noir10.1 Novelization10.2 Documentaries10.3 Possible follow-ups10.4 Comics10.5 Video games10.6 Television seriesBlade Runner 2: The Edge of Human (1995)Blade Runner 3: Replicant Night (1996)Blade Runner 4: Eye and Talon (2000)Brooker, Will, ed. (2005), The Blade Runner Experience, London: Wallflower, ISBN1-904764-30-4Bukatman, Scott (1997), BFI Modern Classics: Blade Runner, London: BFI (British Film Institute), ISBN0-85170-623-1Sammon, Paul M. (1996), Future Noir: the Making of Blade Runner, London: Orion Media, ISBN0-06-105314-7Official websiteOff-world: The Blade Runner WikiBlade Runner at the Internet Movie DatabaseBlade Runner at AllRoviBlade Runner at the TCM Movie DatabaseBlade Runner at Rotten TomatoesBlade Runner at MetacriticBlade Runner at Box Office MojoBlade Runner at the Open Directory ProjectUnforgiven is a 1992 American Western film produced and directed by Clint Eastwood with a screenplay written by David Webb Peoples. The film tells the story of William Munny, an aging outlaw and killer who takes on one more job years after he had hung up his guns and turned to farming. A dark Western that deals frankly with the uglier aspects of violence and the myth of the Old West, it stars Eastwood in the lead role, with Gene Hackman, Morgan Freeman, and Richard Harris.Eastwood dedicated the movie to deceased directors and mentors Don Siegel and Sergio Leone. The film won four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Hackman), and Best Film Editing. Eastwood himself was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for his performance, but he lost to Al Pacino for Scent of a Woman. In 2004, Unforgiven was added to the United States National Film Registry as being deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".The film was only the third western to win the Oscar for Best Picture following Cimarron (1931) and Dances With Wolves (1990).A group of prostitutes in Big Whiskey, Wyoming, led by Strawberry Alice (Frances Fisher), offers a $1,000 reward to whomever can kill Quick Mike (David Mucci) and "Davey-Boy" Bunting (Rob Campbell), two cowboys who disfigured Delilah Fitzgerald (Anna Levine), one of their own. This upsets the local sheriff, Little Bill Daggett (Gene Hackman), a former gunfighter and now an obsessive keeper of the peace who does not allow guns or criminals in his town. Little Bill had given the two men leniency, despite their crime.Miles away in Kansas, the Schofield Kid (Jaimz Woolvett), a boastful young man, visits the pig farm of William Munny (Clint Eastwood), seeking to recruit him to kill the cowboys. In his youth, Munny was a bandit who was notorious for being a vicious, cold-blooded murderer, but he is now a repentant widower raising two children and has sworn off alcohol. Though Munny initially refuses to help with the assassination, his farm is failing, putting his children's future in jeopardy. Munny reconsiders a few days later and sets off to catch up with the Kid. On his way, Munny recruits Ned Logan (Morgan Freeman), another retired gunfighter who reluctantly leaves his wife (Cherrilene Cardinal) to go along.Back in Wyoming, gunfighter English Bob (Richard Harris) and his biographer, W. W. Beauchamp (Saul Rubinek), arrive in Big Whiskey, also seeking the reward. Little Bill and his deputies disarm Bob, and Bill beats him savagely, hoping to set an example for other would-be assassins. The next morning Bob is ejected from town, but Beauchamp decides to stay and write about Bill, who has impressed him with his tales of old gunfights and seeming knowledge of the inner workings of a gunfighter's psyche.Munny, Logan and the Kid arrive later amid a rain storm and go to the saloon/whorehouse to discover the cowboys' location. Munny has a bad fever after riding in the rain, and is sitting alone in the saloon when Little Bill and his deputies arrive to confront him. Little Bill has no idea who Munny is, and after finding a pistol on him he beats him brutally and kicks him out onto the street. Logan and the Kid, upstairs getting "advances" on their payment from the prostitutes, escape out a back window. The three regroup at a barn outside of town, where they nurse Munny back to health.Three days later, they ambush a group of cowboys and kill Bunting although it becomes apparent that Logan and Munny no longer have much stomach for murder. Logan decides to return home while Munny and the Kid head to the cowboys' ranch, where the Kid ambushes Quick Mike in an outhouse and kills him. After they escape, a very distraught Kid confesses he had never killed anyone before, and renounces the gunfighter lifestyle. When Little Sue (Tara Frederick) meets the two men to give them the reward, they learn that Logan was captured by Little Bill's men and tortured to death, but not before giving up the identities of his two accomplices. The Kid heads back to Kansas to deliver the reward money to Munny and Logan's families, while Munny drinks half a bottle of whisky and heads into town to take revenge on Bill.That night, Logan's corpse is displayed in a coffin outside the saloon. Inside, Little Bill has assembled a posse to pursue Munny and the Kid. Munny walks in alone and promptly kills Skinny Dubois (Anthony James), the saloon owner and pimp. After some tense dialogue, a gunfight ensues, Munny shoots Bill in the chest and kills several of the deputies. Munny ceases his gunfire and orders everyone to exit the saloon to avoid further gunfight. At this time, Munny realizes that Bill is not dead and prevents Little Bill from reaching for his pistol. Bill curses Munny. Munny finishes Bill with a final gunshot. While exiting the saloon, Munny threatens the townsfolk that he will return if Logan is not buried properly or if any prostitutes are further harmed. Slowly, Munny rides out of town.The final scene is a bookend shot of Munny's farm, and of Munny paying a final visit to his wife's grave. The epilogue text that follows reads that Munny and his family were rumored to have moved to San Francisco and "prospered in dry goods".The film was written by David Webb Peoples, who had written the Oscar-nominated film The Day After Trinity and co-wrote Blade Runner.[2] The concept for the film dated as far back as 1976 under the titles The Cut-Whore Killings and The William Munny Killings.[2] Eastwood delayed the project, partly because he wanted to wait until he was old enough to play his character and to savor it as the last of his western films. Many said this was to be Eastwood's last film as director and actor, but he chose to keep directing and he quit acting in his own films with the 2008 film Gran Torino. [2] Much of the cinematography for the film was shot in Alberta in August 1991 by director of photography Jack Green.[3] Filming took place over 52 days between September and October 1991.[4] Production designer Henry Bumstead, who had worked with Eastwood on High Plains Drifter, was hired to create the "drained, wintry look" of the western.[3]Unforgiven received near-universal acclaim. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes registers a "Certified Fresh" 97% approval rating among reviews. Many critics acclaimed the film for its noir-ish moral ambiguity and atmosphere. They also acclaimed it as a fitting eulogy to the western genre. Jack Methews of the Los Angeles Times described it as "The finest classical western to come along since perhaps John Ford's 1956 The Searchers." Richard Corliss in Time wrote that the film was "Eastwood's meditation on age, repute, courage, heroism on all those burdens he has been carrying with such grace for decades."[5]However, the film was not without its naysayers, including Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert; though the latter still gave it a positive vote, both criticized the picture for being too long and having too many superfluous characters (such as Harris's English Bob, who enters and leaves without ever meeting the protagonists). Ebert did, however, eventually include the film in his "Great Movies" list.[6]Unforgiven was released on Blu-ray Book on February 21, 2012. Special features include an audio commentary by Clint Eastwood biographer Richard Schickel, four documentaries that include "All on Accounta Pullin' a Trigger", "Eastwood & Co.: Making Unforgiven", "Eastwood...A Star" and "Eastwood on Eastwood", and more.[7]The film debuted at the top position in its opening weekend.[8][9] Its earnings of more than $13million on its opening weekend was the best ever opening for an Eastwood film.[5] Unforgiven eventually earned $160million worldwide in ticket sales, $101million in the United States alone.[10]In June 2008, Unforgiven was listed as the fourth best American film in the western genre (behind The Searchers, High Noon, and Shane) in the American Film Institute's "AFI's 10 Top 10" list.[12][13]The film makes an appearance in AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies. In 2005, Time.com named it one of the 100 best movies of the last 80 years. It was also admitted to the National Film Registry in 2004.The music for the Unforgiven film trailer that appeared in theatres and on some of the DVD's was composed by Randy J. Shams and Tim Stithem in 1992.In 1992, the film poster designer, longtime Eastwood collaborator Bill Gold, won the prestigious Key Art award from The Hollywood Reporter.[14]August 7, 1992(1992-08-07)1 Plot2 Cast3 Production4 Reception5 Home media6 Box office7 Accolades

7.1 Academy Awards
7.2 Others

7.1 Academy Awards7.2 Others8 References

8.1 Bibliography

8.1 Bibliography9 External links7.1 Academy Awards7.2 Others8.1 BibliographyClint Eastwood as William "Will" MunnyGene Hackman as Little Bill DaggettMorgan Freeman as Ned LoganRichard Harris as English BobJaimz Woolvett as The Schofield KidSaul Rubinek as W. W. BeauchampFrances Fisher as Strawberry AliceAnna Levine as Delilah FitzgeraldDavid Mucci as Quick MikeRob Campbell as Davey BuntingAnthony James as Skinny DuboisTara Frederick as Little SueBeverley Elliott as SilkyLiisa Repo-Martell as FaithJosie Smith as Crow Creek KateShane Meier as William Munny Jr.AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  #98AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills  NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:

Sheriff Little Bill Daggett  Nominated Villain
William Munny  Nominated Hero

Sheriff Little Bill Daggett  Nominated VillainWilliam Munny  Nominated HeroAFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"It's a hell of a thing killin' a man. You take away all he's got and all he's ever gonna have."  Nominated

"It's a hell of a thing killin' a man. You take away all he's got and all he's ever gonna have."  NominatedAFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  #68AFI's 10 Top 10  #4 Western FilmSheriff Little Bill Daggett  Nominated VillainWilliam Munny  Nominated Hero"It's a hell of a thing killin' a man. You take away all he's got and all he's ever gonna have."  NominatedHughes, Howard (2009). Aim for the Heart. London: I.B. Tauris. ISBN978-1-84511-902-7.McGilligan, Patrick (1999). Clint: The Life and Legend. London: Harper Collins. ISBN0-00-638354-8.Unforgiven at the Internet Movie DatabaseUnforgiven at AllRoviUnforgiven at Rotten TomatoesUnforgiven at Box Office MojoUnforgiven at Filmsite.orgUnforgiven at the Arts & Faith Top100 Spiritually Significant Films listPsychoanalytic review of UnforgivenEssay on the filmGuess Who's Coming to Dinner is a 1967 American drama film starring Spencer Tracy, Sidney Poitier and Katharine Hepburn, and featuring Hepburn's niece Katharine Houghton. The film contains a (then rare) positive representation of the controversial subject of interracial marriage, which historically had been illegal in most states of the United States, and was still illegal in 17 states, mostly Southern states, up until 12 June 1967, two days after Tracy died, when anti-miscegenation laws were struck down by the Supreme Court in Loving v. Virginia. The film was produced and directed by Stanley Kramer and written by William Rose. The movie's Oscar-nominated score was composed by Frank DeVol.[4]The film is notable for being the ninth and final on-screen pairing of Tracy and Hepburn (filming ended just 17 days before Tracy's death). Hepburn never saw the completed film;[5] she said the memories of Tracy were too painful. The film was released in December 1967, six months after his death.[6]The film tells the story of Joanna "Joey" Drayton (Katharine Houghton), a young white woman who has had a whirlwind romance with Dr. John Prentice (Sidney Poitier), a young, idealistic black physician she met while in Hawaii. The plot centers on Joannas return to her liberal upper-class American home in San Francisco, bringing her new fianc to dinner to meet her parents (newspaper publisher Matt Drayton (Spencer Tracy), perhaps a Hearst characterization, and his wife, small art gallery owner Christina Drayton (Katharine Hepburn)).[7]Brought up by her parents as a liberal, Joanna finds it difficult to comprehend the behavior of her parents on meeting John. While they taught her to treat blacks and members of other racial groups as equals, they cannot accept their daughter's actions, for they did not expect her to introduce to them a black man as their future son-in-law. John's parents (Roy E. Glenn, Beah Richards) fly up from Los Angeles to the Draytons' dinner but don't know that Joanna is white until they meet her. Monsignor Ryan (Cecil Kellaway), a senior Catholic priest friend of Matt, is also present at dinner and is a voice for tolerance.The film depicts the reaction of family and friends, and the discomfort of their parents, as all try to accept the couple's choice. The film also touches on black-on-black racism when John is taken to task by his father and the household maid Tillie (Isabel Sanford) for his perceived presumption. Unbeknown to Joey, John conditions the marriage as dependent upon the approval of Matt, whose decision in turn faces a deadline dependent on John's tight airline flight schedules.Production list[8]According to Kramer, he and Rose intentionally structured the film to debunk ethnic stereotypes; the young doctor, a typical role for the young Sidney Poitier, was purposely created idealistically perfect, so that the only possible objection to his marrying Joanna would be his race, or the fact she had only known him for ten days: the character has thus graduated from a top school, begun innovative medical initiatives in Africa, refused to have premarital sex with his fiance despite her willingness, and leaves money in an open container on his future father-in-law's desk in payment for a long distance phone call he has made.Kramer and Rose composed the film script in five weeks.[9]Kramer stated later that the principal actors believed so strongly in the premise that they agreed to act in the project even before seeing the script. Production had been set for January 1967 and ended on May 26, 1967.[10] Spencer Tracy was dying and insurance companies refused to cover him; Kramer and Hepburn put their salaries in escrow so that if he died, filming could be completed with another actor. According to Kramer, "'You're never examined for insurance until a few weeks before a picture starts. [Even] with all his drinking and ailments, Tracy always qualified for insurance before, so nobody thought it would be a problem in this case. But it was. We couldn't get insurance for Spence. The situation looked desperate. So then we figured out a way of handling it. Kate and I put up our own salaries to compensate for the lack of an insurance company for Spence. And we were allowed to proceed.'"[11]The filming schedule was altered to accommodate Tracy's failing health.[12] All of Tracy's scenes and shots were filmed between 9:00AM and noon of each day in order to give him adequate time to rest.[9] For example, most of Tracy's dialogue scenes were filmed in a such a way that during close-ups on other characters, a stand-in was substituted for him.[13]Tracy's failing health was more serious than most people are aware of. According to Sidney Poitier: "The illness of Spencer dominated everything. I knew his health was very poor and many of the people who knew what the situation was didn't believe we'd finish the film, that is, that Tracy would be able to finish the film. Those of us who were close knew it was worse than they thought. Kate brought him to and from the set. She worked with him on his lines. She made sure with [Stanley] Kramer that his hours were right for what he could do, and what he couldn't do was different each day. There were days when he couldn't do anything. There were days when he was great, and I got the chance to know what it was like working with Tracy."[14]A bust of Spencer Tracy sculpted by Hepburn herself was used as a prop, on the bookshelf behind the desk where Sidney Poitier makes his phone call. Tracy died two weeks after he completed his work on the film.[15]Katharine Hepburn significantly helped cast her niece, Katharine Houghton, for the role of Joey Drayton. Concerning the matter, Hepburn stated: "There was a lovely part for Kathy [Houghton], my niece [...] She would play Spencer's and my daughter. I loved that. She's beautiful and she definitely had a family resemblance. It was my idea."[16]According to Hepburn, the role of Joey Drayton would be one of Houghton's first major roles as a young actress. "The part of my daughter," Kate said, "was a difficult one. A young unknown actress needs more opportunity to win the sympathy of the audience. Otherwise, too much has to depend on her youth, innocence, and beauty. She had one good speech to win the audience, but it was cut. Instead she only talks with her father about the differences between the principles he taught her and the way he's behaving."[17]Sidney Poitier frequently found himself star-struck and as a result, a bit tongue-tied, in the presence of Hepburn and Tracy, whom he considered to be "giants" as far as acting is concerned.[18] However, Poitier found a way to overcome his nerves. "When I went to play a scene with Tracy and Hepburn, I couldn't remember a word. Finally Stanley Kramer said to me, 'What are we going to do?' I said, 'Stanley, send those two people home. I will play the scene against two empty chairs. I don't want them here because I can't handle that kind of company.' He sent them home. I played the scene in close-up against two empty chairs as the dialogue coach read Mr. Tracy's and Miss Hepburn's lines from off camera."[18]Given the tense nature of racial tension in America during the time of the film's production, Poitier felt he was "under close observation by both" Tracy and Hepburn during their first dinner meetings prior to production.[19] But he swiftly won them over. Due to Tracy and Hepburn's close history with Kramer, Poitier cited that Hepburn and Tracy came to bear on him "the kind of respect they had for Kramer, and they had to say to themselves (and I'm sure they did), This kid has to be pretty okay, because Stanley is nuts about working with him".[20]The film premiered in theaters on January 1, 1968. The film falls into the genre of comedy drama.[21] The film was released on VHS on December 12, 1987,[22] on the twentieth anniversary of the original release. The film was released on DVD on May 22, 2001.[23]Guess Who's Coming to Dinner was a box-office hit in 1968 throughout the United States, including in the southern states where it was traditionally assumed that few white filmgoers would want to see any film with black leads. As a result, the success of this film meant that particular consideration in film marketing would never be considered a problem again.[24] Despite this success, which included numerous film award nominations, Frank Rich of the New York Times wrote in November 2008 that the film was frequently labeled as dated among liberals. Another main point of contention was the fact that Poitier's character, the golden future son-in-law, had no flaws and a resume of good deeds that could fill an entire volume. Many people felt that the dynamic between the Draytons and Dr. John Wade Prentice (Poitier's character) would have inevitably resulted in a happily-ever-after film ending because Poitier's character was so perfect, respectable, likable, and proper. Some people went as far as saying Prentice was 'too white' to not be accepted by the Draytons.[25]The release of the film in the U.S. gave Poitier his third box-office success in six months in 1967,[23] all of which placed the race of Poitier's character at issue.In a 1995 review of the film by Ted Wick of Alberta Report Newsmagazine, Guess Who's Coming to Dinner is deemed as being "well-worth viewing (or re-viewing)."[26]In a review of the film by New York Times, Lawrence Van Gelder wrote: "the suspicion arises that were the film made today its makers would come to grips a good deal more bluntly with the problems of intermarriage. Still, this remains a deft comedy and - most of all - a paean to the power of love."[27]The original version of the film that played in theaters in 1968 contained a moment in which Tillie responds to the question "Guess who's coming to dinner now?" with the sarcastic one-liner: "The Reverend Martin Luther King?" After King's assassination on April 4, 1968, this line was removed from the film, so by August 1968, almost all theaters showings of this film had this line omitted. As early as 1969, the line was restored to many but not all prints, and the line was preserved in the VHS and DVD versions of the film as well.The film won two Academy Awards and two BAFTAs:[28]Stanley Kramer directed a remake for television in 1975.[citation needed]In 2003, comedian Daniele Luttazzi published the screenplay Tab, an almost verbatim parody of the film. In the variation, the engaged lovers are aged 40 (him) and 12 (her), and are brother and sister.[31]The 2005 film Guess Who starring Ashton Kutcher and Bernie Mac is a loose remake styled as a comedy rather than a drama, with the racial roles reversed; black parents are caught off-guard when their daughter brings home the young white man she has chosen to marry. Of the film, Bernie Mac told USA Today in 2003, "Interracial dating is not that significant anymore." In the article, the writer cites that during the time at which the original movie was filmed, "interracial marriage was considered risky." Casting for Mac's remake of the film began in November 2003. Mac said of the script, "They want to make it a comedy, but I won't disrespect Spencer, Katharine or Sidney (Poitier)."[32]Irish writer Roddy Doyle wrote a short story by the same title about an Irish girl who brings home an immigrant from Nigeria, published in 2008 in the collection The Deportees.The plot is very similar to another film, Crossroads, made by Canadian director Don Haldane a decade earlier in 1957. In this film, a young white woman in Toronto surprises her mother with her black fianc.[33]1 Summary2 Cast3 Production4 Release5 Reviews and reception6 Variant versions7 Awards and honors

7.1 Wins
7.2 Nominations
7.3 American Film Institute recognition

7.1 Wins7.2 Nominations7.3 American Film Institute recognition8 Remakes9 Further reading10 References11 External links7.1 Wins7.2 Nominations7.3 American Film Institute recognitionSpencer Tracy as Matt DraytonSidney Poitier as Dr. John PrenticeKatharine Hepburn as Christina DraytonKatharine Houghton as Joanna "Joey" DraytonCecil Kellaway as Monsignor RyanBeah Richards as Mrs. PrenticeRoy E. Glenn as Mr. PrenticeVirginia Christine as Hilary St.GeorgeAlexandra Hay as CarhopIsabel Sanford as Matilda "Tillie" BinksBarbara Randolph as DorothyD'Urville Martin as FrankieTom Heaton as PeterGrace Gaynor as JudithSkip Martin as Delivery BoyJohn Hudkins as Cab DriverJacqueline Fontaine as Singer (uncredited)Produced by: Stanley KramerAssociate Producer: George GlassDirected by: Stanley KramerAssistant Director: Ray GosnellOriginal Screenplay by: William RosePhotography by: Sam LeavittSpecial Effects by: Geza GasparProcess Photography by: Larry ButlerProduction Designer: Robert ClatworthySet Decorator: Frank TuttleMusic by: Frank de VolSound Recorders: Charles J. Rice, Robert MartinFilm Editor: Robert C. JonesCostumes by: Joe KingWardrobe Supervisor: Jean LouisSong "Glory of Love" by: Billy Hill, sung by Jacqueline Fontaine1967: Academy Award for Best Actress (Katharine Hepburn)1967: Academy Award for Writing Original Screenplay1968: BAFTA Film Award for Best Actor (Spencer Tracy)1968: BAFTA Film Award for Best Actress (Katharine Hepburn)1968: David di Donatello for Best Foreign Producer (Stanley Kramer)1968: David di Donatello for Best Foreign Actor (Spencer Tracy)1968: David di Donatello for Best Foreign Actress (Katharine Hepburn)1967: Academy Award for Best Picture1967: Academy Award for Best Director1967: Academy Award for Best Actor (Spencer Tracy)1967: Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor (Cecil Kellaway)1967: Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress (Beah Richards)1967: Academy Award for Best Art Direction (Robert Clatworthy, Frank Tuttle)1967: Academy Award for Film Editing1967: Academy Award for Best Original Score (Frank DeVol)AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies - #99AFI's 100 Years...100 Passions - #58AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:

"You think of yourself as a colored man. I think of myself as a man." - Nominated[29]

"You think of yourself as a colored man. I think of myself as a man." - Nominated[29]AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers - #35AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - Nominated[30]"You think of yourself as a colored man. I think of myself as a man." - Nominated[29]Andersen, Christopher (1997). An Affair to Remember: The Remarkable Love Story of Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy. William Morrow and Company, Inc. pp.294298. ISBN0-688-15311-9.Chandler, Charlotte (2010). I Know Where I'm Going: Katharine Hepburn - A Personal Biography. Simon & Schuster. pp.229237. ISBN978-1-4391-4928-7.Davidson, Bill (1987). Spencer Tracy, Tragic Idol. E. P. Dutton. pp.206211. ISBN0-525-24631-2.Edwards, Anne (1985). A Remarkable Woman: A Biography of Katharine Hepburn. William Morrow and Company, Inc. pp.336343, 355 & 439. ISBN0-688-04528-6.Poitier, Sidney (2000). The Measure of a Man: A Spiritual Autobiography. HarperSanFrancisco Publishers, Inc. pp.117124. ISBN0-06-251607-8.Poitier, Sidney (1980). This Life. Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. pp.285287. ISBN0-394-50549-2.Schirmer Encyclopedia of Film - Volume 1: Crime Film. Gale. 2007. pp.6,63,351. ISBN0-02-865792-6.Schirmer Encyclopedia of Film - Volume 3: Independent Film - Road Movies. Gale. 2007. pp.371372. ISBN0-02-865794-2.Guess Who's Coming to Dinner at the Internet Movie DatabaseGuess Who's Coming to Dinner at Rotten TomatoesGuess Who's Coming to Dinner at the TCM Movie DatabaseGuess Who's Coming to Dinner at AllRoviSidney Poitier about his children becoming presidentToy Story is an American computer animated family comedy film produced by Pixar Animation Studios and directed by John Lasseter in 1995. Released by Walt Disney Pictures, Toy Story was the first feature length computer animated film and the first film produced by Pixar. Toy Story follows a group of anthropomorphic toys who pretend to be lifeless whenever humans are present, and focuses on Woody, a pullstring cowboy doll (Tom Hanks), and Buzz Lightyear, an astronaut action figure (Tim Allen). Woody feels profoundly threatened and jealous when Buzz supplants him as the top toy in the room. The film was written by John Lasseter, Andrew Stanton, Joel Cohen, Alec Sokolow, and Joss Whedon, and featured music by Randy Newman. Its executive producer was Steve Jobs with Edwin Catmull.Pixar, who had been producing short animated films to promote their computers, was approached by Disney to produce a computer animated feature after the success of the short Tin Toy (1988), which is told from the perspective of a toy. Lasseter, Stanton, and Pete Docter wrote early story treatments which were thrown out by Disney, who pushed for a more edgy film. After disastrous story reels, production was halted and the script was re-written, better reflecting the tone and theme Pixar desired: that "toys deeply want children to play with them, and that this desire drives their hopes, fears, and actions."[2] The studio, then consisting of a relatively small number of employees, produced the film under minor financial constraints.[3][4]The top-grossing film on its opening weekend,[5] Toy Story went on to earn over $361million worldwide.[1] Reviews were highly positive, praising both the technical innovation of the animation and the wit and sophistication of the screenplay,[6][7] and it is now widely considered, by many critics, to be one of the best animated films.[8][9][10][11][12][13][14] In addition to home media releases and theatrical re-releases, Toy Story-inspired material has run the gamut from toys, video games, theme park attractions, spin-offs, merchandise, and two sequelsToy Story 2 (1999) and Toy Story 3 (2010)both of which received massive commercial success and critical acclaim. Toy Story was selected into the National Film Registry as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" in 2005, its first year of eligibility.[15]Woody is a pull-string cowboy doll and leader of a group of toys that belong to a boy named Andy Davis, which act lifeless when humans are present. With his family moving homes one week before his birthday, the toys stage a reconnaissance mission to discover Andy's new presents. Andy receives a space ranger Buzz Lightyear action figure, whose impressive features see him replacing Woody as Andy's favorite toy. Woody is resentful, especially as Buzz also gets attention from the other toys. However Buzz believes himself to be a real space ranger on a mission to return to his home planet, as Woody fails to convince him he is a toy.Andy prepares for a family outing at the space themed Pizza Planet restaurant with Buzz. Woody attempts to be picked by misplacing Buzz. He intends to trap Buzz in a gap behind Andy's desk, but the plan goes disastrously wrong when he accidentally knocks Buzz out the window, resulting in him being accused of murdering Buzz out of jealousy. With Buzz missing, Andy takes Woody to Pizza Planet, but Buzz climbs into the car and confronts Woody when they stop at a gas station. The two fight and fall out of the car, which drives off and leaves them behind. Woody spots a truck bound for Pizza Planet and plans to rendezvous with Andy there, convincing Buzz to come with him by telling him it will take him to his home planet. Once at Pizza Planet, Buzz makes his way into a claw game machine shaped like a spaceship, thinking it to be the ship Woody promised him. Inside, he finds squeaky aliens who revere the claw arm as their master. When Woody clambers into the machine to rescue Buzz, the aliens force the two towards the claw and they are captured by Andys neighbor Sid Phillips, who finds amusement in torturing and destroying toys.At Sid's house, the two attempt to escape before Andy's moving day, encountering Sids nightmarish toy creations and his vicious dog, Scud. Buzz sees a commercial for Buzz Lightyear action figures and realizes that he really is a toy. Attempting to fly to test this, Buzz falls and loses one of his arms, going into depression and unable to cooperate with Woody. Woody waves Buzzs arm from a window to seek help from the toys in Andys room, but they are horrified thinking Woody attacked him, while Woody realizes Sid's toys are friendly when they reconnect Buzz's arm. Sid prepares to destroy Buzz by strapping him to a rocket, but is delayed that evening by a thunderstorm. Woody convinces Buzz that life is worth living because of the joy he can bring to Andy, which helps Buzz regain his spirit. Cooperating with Sid's toys, Woody rescues Buzz and scares Sid away by coming to life in front of him, warning him to never torture toys again. Woody and Buzz then wave goodbye to the mutant toys and return home through a fence, but miss Andys car as it drives away to his new house.Down the road, they climb onto the moving truck containing Andys other toys, but Scud chases them and Buzz tackles the dog to save Woody. Woody attempts to rescue Buzz with Andy's RC car but the other toys, who think Woody now got rid of RC, toss Woody off onto the road. Spotting Woody driving RC back with Buzz alive, the other toys realize their mistake and try to help. When RC's batteries become depleted, Woody ignites the rocket on Buzz's back and manages to throw RC into the moving truck before they soar into the air. Buzz opens his wings to cut himself free before the rocket explodes, gliding with Woody to land safely into a box in Andys car. Andy looks into it and is elated to have found his two missing toys.On Christmas Day at their new house, Buzz and Woody stage another reconnaissance mission to prepare for the new toy arrivals, one of which is a Mrs. Potato Head, much to the delight of Mr. Potato Head. As Woody jokingly asks what might be worse than Buzz, the two share a worried smile as they discover Andy's new gift is a puppy.Director John Lasseter's first experience with computer animation was during his work as an animator at Disney, when two of his friends showed him the lightcycle scene from Tron. It was an eye-opening experience which awakened Lasseter to the possibilities offered by the new medium of computer-generated animation.[16] Lasseter tried to pitch the idea of a fully computer animated film to Disney, but the idea was rejected and Lasseter was fired. He then went on to work at Lucasfilm and later as a founding member of Pixar, which was purchased by entrepreneur and Apple Computer founder Steve Jobs in 1986.[17] At Pixar, Lasseter created short, computer-animated films to show off the Pixar Image Computer's capabilities, and Tin Toy (1988) a short told from the perspective of a toy, referencing Lasseter's love of classic toys would go on to claim the 1988 Academy Award for animated short films, the first computer- generated film to do so.[18] Tin Toy gained Disney's attention, and the new team at DisneyCEO Michael Eisner and chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg in the film division began a quest to get Lasseter to come back.[18] Lasseter, grateful for Jobss faith in him, felt compelled to stay with Pixar, telling co-founder Ed Catmull, "I can go to Disney and be a director, or I can stay here and make history."[18] Katzenberg realized he could not lure Lasseter back to Disney and therefore set plans into motion to ink a production deal with Pixar to produce a film.[18]Both sides were willing. Catmull and fellow Pixar co-founder Alvy Ray Smith had long wanted to produce a computer-animated feature.[19] In addition, The Walt Disney Company had licensed Pixar's Computer Animation Production System (CAPS), and that made it the largest customer for Pixars computers.[20] Jobs made it apparent to Katzenberg that although Disney was happy with Pixar, it was not the other way around: "We want to do a film with you," said Jobs. "That would make us happy."[20] At this same time, Peter Schneider, president of Walt Disney Feature Animation, was potentially interested in making a feature film with Pixar.[19] When Catmull, Smith and head of animation Ralph Guggenheim met with Schneider in the summer of 1990, they found the atmosphere to be puzzling and contentious. They later learned that Katzenberg intended that if Disney were to make a film with Pixar, it would be outside Schneider's purview, which aggravated Schneider.[21] After that first meeting, the Pixar contingent went home with low expectations and were surprised when Katzenberg called for another conference. Catmull, Smith and Guggenheim were joined by Bill Reeves (head of animation research and development), Jobs, and Lasseter. They brought with them an idea for a half-hour television special called A Tin Toy Christmas. They reasoned that a television program would be a sensible way to gain experience before tackling a feature film.[22]They met with Katzenberg at a conference table in the Team Disney building at the company's headquarters in Burbank.[22] Catmull and Smith considered it would be difficult to keep Katzenberg interested in working with the company over time. They considered it even more difficult to sell Lasseter and the junior animators on the idea of working with Disney, who had a bad reputation for how they treated their animators, and Katzenberg, who had built a reputation as a micromanaging tyrant.[22] Katzenberg asserted this himself in the meeting: "Everybody thinks Im a tyrant. I am a tyrant. But Im usually right."[20] He threw out the idea of a half-hour special and eyed Lasseter as the key talent in the room: "John, since you won't come work for me, I'm going to make it work this way."[20][22] He invited the six visitors to mingle with the animators"ask them anything at all"and the men did so, finding they all backed up Katzenberg's statements. Lasseter felt he would be able to work with Disney and the two companies began negotiations.[23] Pixar at this time was on the verge of bankruptcy and needed a deal with Disney.[20] Katzenberg insisted that Disney be given the rights to Pixars proprietary technology for making 3-D animation, but Jobs refused.[23] In another case, Jobs demanded Pixar would have part ownership of the film and its characters, sharing control of both video rights and sequels, but Katzenberg refused.[20] Disney and Pixar reached accord on contract terms in an agreement dated May 3, 1991, and signed on in early July.[24] Eventually the deal specified that Disney would own the picture and its characters outright, have creative control, and pay Pixar about 12.5% of the ticket revenues.[25][26] It had the option (but not the obligation) to do Pixars next two films and the right to make (with or without Pixar) sequels using the characters in the film. Disney could also kill the film at any time with only a small penalty. These early negotiations would become a point of contention between Jobs and Eisner for many years.[20]An agreement to produce a feature film based on Tin Toy with a working title of Toy Story was finalized and production began soon thereafter.[27]The original treatment for Toy Story, drafted by Lasseter, Andrew Stanton, and Pete Docter, had little in common with the eventual finished film.[2] It paired Tinny, the one-man band from Tin Toy with a ventriloquist's dummy and sent them on a sprawling odyssey. The core idea of Toy Story was present from the treatment onward, however: that "toys deeply want children to play with them, and that this desire drives their hopes, fears, and actions."[2] Katzenberg felt the original treatment was problematic and told Lasseter to reshape Toy Story as more of an odd-couple buddy picture, and suggested they watch some classic buddy movies, such as The Defiant Ones and 48 Hrs., in which two characters with different attitudes are thrown together and have to bond.[28][29] Lasseter, Stanton, and Docter emerged in early September 1991 was the second treatment, and although the lead characters were still Tinny and the dummy, the outline of the final film was beginning to take shape.[28]The script went through many changes before the final version. Lasseter decided Tinny was "too antiquated", and the character was changed to a military action figure, and then given a space theme. Tinny's name changed to Lunar Larry, then Tempus from Morph, and eventually Buzz Lightyear (after astronaut Buzz Aldrin).[30] Lightyear's design was modeled on the suits worn by Apollo astronauts as well as G.I. Joe action figures.[31][32] Woody the second character, was inspired by a Casper the Friendly Ghost doll that Lasseter had when he was a child. Originally Woody was a ventriloquist's dummy with a pull-string (hence the name Woody). However, character designer, Bud Luckey suggested that Woody could be changed to a cowboy ventriloquist dummy, John Lasseter liked the contrast between the Western genre and the Sci-Fi genre and the character immediately changed. Eventually all the ventriloquist dummy aspects of the character were deleted, because the dummy was designed to look "sneaky and mean."[33] However they kept the name Woody to pay homage to the Western Actor Woody Strode.[30] The story department drew inspiration from films such as Midnight Run and The Odd Couple,[34] and Lasseter screened Hayao Miyazaki's Castle in the Sky (1986) for further influence.[35]Toy Story's script was strongly influenced by the ideas of screenwriter Robert McKee. The members of Pixar's story teamLasseter, Stanton, Docter and Joe Ranftwere aware that most of them were beginners at writing for feature films. None of them had any feature story or writing credits to their name besides Ranft, who had taught a story class at CalArts and did some storyboard work prior.[33] Seeking insight, Lasseter and Docter attended a three-day seminar in Los Angeles given by McKee. His principles, grounded in Aristotle's Poetics, dictated that a character emerges most realistically and compellingly from the choices that the protagonist makes in reaction to his problems.[35] Disney also appointed Joel Cohen, Alec Sokolow and, later, Joss Whedon to help develop the script. Whedon found that the script wasn't working but had a great structure, and added the character of Rex and sought a pivotal role for Barbie.[36] The story team continued to touch up the script as production was underway. Among the late additions was the encounter between Buzz and the alien squeak toys at Pizza Planet, which emerged from a brainstorming session with a dozen directors, story artists, and animators from Disney.[37]Katzenberg gave approval for the script on January 19, 1993, at which point voice casting could begin.[38] Lasseter always wanted Tom Hanks to play the character of Woody. Lasseter claimed Hanks "... has the ability to take emotions and make them appealing. Even if the character, like the one in A League of Their Own, is down-and-out and despicable."[38] Billy Crystal was approached to play Buzz, but turned down the role, which he later regretted, although he would voice Mike Wazowski in Pixar's later success, Monsters, Inc..[39][40] Lasseter took the role to Tim Allen, who was appearing in Disney's Home Improvement, and he accepted.[41]To gauge how an actor's voice would fit with a character, Lasseter borrowed a common Disney technique: animate a vocal monologue from a well-established actor to meld the actor's voice with the appearance or actions of the animated character.[36] This early test footage, using Hanks' voice from Turner & Hooch, convinced Hanks to sign on to the film.[38][42] Toy Story was both Hanks and Allen's first animated film role.[43]Every couple of weeks, Lasseter and his team would put together their latest set of storyboards or footage to show Disney. In early screen tests, Pixar impressed Disney with the technical innovation but convincing Disney of the plot was more difficult. At each presentation by Pixar, Katzenberg would tear much of it up, giving out detailed comments and notes. Katzenbergs big push was to add more edginess to the two main characters.[29] Disney wanted the film to appeal to both children and adults, and asked for adult references to be added to the film.[38] After many rounds of notes from Katzenberg and other Disney execs, the general consensus was that Woody had been stripped of almost all charm.[29][41] Tom Hanks, while recording the dialogue for the story reels, exclaimed at one point that the character was a jerk.[29] Lasseter and his Pixar team had the first half of the movie ready to screen, so they brought it down to Burbank to show to Katzenberg and other Disney executives on November 19, 1993, a day they later dubbed "Black Friday."[4][38] The results were disastrous, and Schneider, who was never particularly enamored of Katzenbergs idea of having outsiders make animation for Disney, declared it a mess and ordered that production be stopped immediately.[44] Katzenberg asked colleague Tom Schumacher why the reels were bad. Schumacher replied bluntly: "Because its not their movie anymore."[4]Lasseter was embarrassed with what was on the screen, later recalling, "It was a story filled with the most unhappy, mean characters that Ive ever seen." He asked Disney for the chance to retreat back to Pixar and rework the script in two weeks, and Katzenberg was supportive.[4] Lasseter, Stanton, Docter and Ranft delivered the news of the production shutdown to the production crew, many of whom had left other jobs to work on the project. In the meantime, the crew would shift to television commercials while the head writers worked out a new script. Although Lasseter kept morale high by remaining outwardly buoyant, the production shutdown was "a very scary time," recalled story department manager BZ Petroff.[45] Schneider had initially wanted to shutdown production altogether and fire all recently hired animators.[46] Katzenberg put the film under the wing of Disney Feature Animation. The Pixar team was pleased that the move would give them an open door to counsel from Disney's animation veterans. Schenider, however, continued to take a dim view of the project and would later go over Katzenberg's head to urge Eisner to cancel it.[28] Stanton retreated into a small, dark windowless office, emerging periodically with new script pages. He and the other story artists would then draw the shots on storyboards. Whedon came back to Pixar for part of the shutdown to help with revising, and the script was revised in two weeks as promised.[45] When Katzenberg and Schneider halted production on Toy Story, Steve Jobs kept the work going with his own personal funding. Jobs did not insert himself much into the creative process, respecting the artists at Pixar and instead managing the relationship with Disney.[4]The Pixar team came back with a new script three months later, with the character of Woody morphed from being a tyrannical boss of Andys other toys to being their wise leader. It also included a more adult-oriented staff meeting amongst the toys rather than a juvenile group discussion that had existed in earlier drafts. Buzz Lightyear's character was also changed slightly "to make it more clear to the audience that he really doesn't realize he's a toy."[46] Katzenberg and Schneider approved the new approach, and by February 1994 the film was back in production.[4] The voice actors returned in March 1994 to record their new lines.[38] When production was greenlit, the crew quickly grew from its original size of 24 to 110, including 27 animators, 22 technical directors, and 61 other artists and engineers.[3][47] In comparison, The Lion King, released in 1994, required a budget of $45million and a staff of 800.[3] In the early budgeting process, Jobs was eager to produce the film as efficiently as possible, impressing Katzenberg with his focus on cost-cutting. Despite this, the $17 million production budget was proving inadequate, especially given the major revision that was necessary after Katzenberg had pushed them to make Woody too edgy. Jobs demanded more funds in order to complete the film right, and insisted that Disney was liable for the cost overruns. Katzenberg was not willing, and Ed Catmull, described as "more diplomatic than Jobs," was able to reach a compromise new budget.[4]"We couldn't have made this movie in traditional animation. This is a story that can only really be told with three-dimensional toy characters. ... Some of the shots in this film are so beautiful."Toy Story was the first fully computer animated feature film. Recruiting animators for Toy Story was brisk; the magnet for talent was not the pay, generally mediocre, but rather the allure of taking part in the first computer-animated feature.[47] Lasseter spoke on the challenges of the computer animation in the film: "We had to make things look more organic. Every leaf and blade of grass had to be created. We had to give the world a sense of history. So the doors are banged up, the floors have scuffs."[38] The film began with animated storyboards to guide the animators in developing the characters. 27 animators worked on the film, using 400 computer models to animate the characters. Each character was either created out of clay or was first modeled off of a computer-drawn diagram before reaching the computer animated design.[49] Once the animators had a model, articulation and motion controls were coded, allowing each character to move in a variety of ways, such as talking, walking, or jumping.[49] Of all of the characters, Woody was the most complex as he required 723 motion controls, including 212 for his face and 58 for his mouth.[38][50] The first piece of animation, a 30-second test, was delivered to Disney in June 1992 when the company requested a sample of what the film would look like. Lasseter wanted to impress Disney with a number of things in the test piece that could not be done in traditional, hand-drawn animation, such as Woody's plaid shirt or venetian blind shadows falling across the room.[33]Every shot in the film passed through the hands of eight different teams. The art department gave a shot its color scheme and general lighting.[51] The layout department, under Craig Good, then placed the models in the shot, framed the shot by setting the location of the virtual camera, and programmed any camera moves. To make the medium feel as familiar as possible, they sought to stay within the limits of what might be done in a live-action film with real cameras, dollies, tripods and cranes.[51] From layout, a shot went to the animation department, headed by directing animators Rich Quade and Ash Brannon. Lasseter opted against Disney's approach of assigning an animator to work on a character throughout a film, but made certain exceptions in scenes where he felt acting was particularly critical.[51] The animators used the Menv program to set the character into a desired pose. Once a sequence of hand-built poses, or "keyframes", was created, the software would build the poses from the frames in-between.[52] The animators studied videotapes of the actors for inspiration, and Lasseter rejected automatic lip-syncing.[52] To sync the characters mouths and facial expressions to the actors' voices, animators spent a week per 8 seconds of animation.[49]After this the animators would compile the scenes, and develop a new storyboard with the computer animated characters. Animators then added shading, lighting, visual effects, and finally used 300 computer processors to render the film to its final design.[49][50] The shading team, under Tom Porter, used RenderMan's shader language to create shader programs for each of a model's surfaces. A few surfaces in Toy Story came from real objects: a shader for the curtain fabric in Andy's room used a scan of actual cloth.[53] After animation and shading, the final lighting of the shot was orchestrated by the lighting team, under Galyn Susman and Sharon Calahan. The completed shot then went into rendering on a "render farm" of 117 Sun Microsystems computers that ran 24 hours a day.[37] Finished animation emerged in a steady drip of around three minutes a week.[54] Each frame took from 45 minutes up to 30 hours to render, depending on its complexity. In total, the film required 800,000 machine hours and 114,240 frames of animation.[38][49][55] There is over 77 minutes of animation spread across 1,561 shots.[51] A camera team, aided by David DiFrancesco, recorded the frames onto film stock. Toy Story was rendered at a mere 1,536 by 922 pixels, with each pixel corresponding to roughly a quarter inch of screen area on a typical cinema screen.[37] During post-production, the film was sent to Skywalker Sound where sound effects were mixed with the music score.[50]Disney was concerned with Lasseter's position on the use of music. Unlike other Disney films of the time, Lasseter did not want the film to be a musical, saying it was a buddy film featuring "real toys." Joss Whedon agreed saying, "It would have been a really bad musical, because it's a buddy movie. It's about people who won't admit what they want, much less sing about it. ... Buddy movies are about sublimating, punching an arm, 'I hate you.' It's not about open emotion."[38] However, Disney favored the musical format, claiming "Musicals are our orientation. Characters breaking into song is a great shorthand. It takes some of the onus off what they're asking for."[38] Disney and Pixar reached a compromise: the characters in Toy Story would not break into song, but the film would use songs over the action, as in The Graduate, to convey and amplify the emotions that Buzz and Woody were feeling.[36] Disney tapped Randy Newman to compose the film. The edited Toy Story was due to Randy Newman and Gary Rydstrom in late September 1995 for their final work on the score and sound design, respectively.[56]Lasseter claimed "His songs are touching, witty, and satirical, and he would deliver the emotional underpinning for every scene."[38] Newman developed the film's signature song "You've Got a Friend in Me" in one day[38] although the tune is closely based on his own song, "I Love to See You Smile" from the soundtrack to the 1989 film, Parenthood.It was difficult for crew members to perceive the film's quality during much of the production process, when the finished footage was in scattered pieces and lacked elements like music and sound design.[54] Some animators felt the film would be a significant disappointment commercially, but felt animators and animation fans would find it interesting.[54] According to Lee Unkrich, one of the original editors of Toy Story, a scene was cut out of the original final edit. The scene features Sid, after Pizza Planet, torturing Buzz and Woody violently. Unkrich decided to cut right into the scene where Sid is interrogating the toys because the creators of the movie thought the audience would be loving Buzz and Woody at that point.[57] Another scene, where Woody was trying to get Buzz's attention when he was stuck in the box crate, was shortened because the creators felt it would lose the energy of the movie.[57] Peter Schneider had grown buoyant about the film as it neared completion, and announced a United States release date of November, coinciding with Thanksgiving weekend and the start of the winter holiday season.[58]Sources indicate that executive producer Steve Jobs lacked confidence in the film during its production, and he had been talking to various companies, ranging from Hallmark to Microsoft, about selling Pixar.[4][58] However, as the film progressed, Jobs became ever more excited about it, feeling that he might be on the verge of transforming the movie industry.[4] As scenes from the movie were finished, he watched them repeatedly and had friends come by his home to share his new passion. Jobs decided that the release of Toy Story that November would be the occasion to take Pixar public.[4] A test audience near Anaheim in late July 1995 indicated the need for last-minute tweaks, which added further pressure to the already frenetic final weeks. Response cards from the audience were encouraging, but were not top of the scale, adding further question as to how audiences would respond.[56] The film ended with a shot of Andy's house and the sound of a new puppy. Michael Eisner, who attended the screening, told Lasseter afterward that the film needed to end with a shot of Woody and Buzz together, reacting to the news of the puppy.[56]The soundtrack for Toy Story was produced by Walt Disney Records and was released on November 22, 1995, the week of the film's release. Scored and written by Randy Newman, the soundtrack has received praise for its "sprightly, stirring score".[60] Despite the album's critical success, the soundtrack only peaked at number 94 on the Billboard 200 album chart.[61] A cassette and CD single release of "You've Got a Friend in Me" was released on April 12, 1996, in order to promote the soundtrack's release.[59] The soundtrack was remastered in 2006 and although it is no longer available physically, the album is available for purchase digitally in retailers such as iTunes.[62]All songs written and composed by Randy Newman.There were two premieres of Toy Story in November 1995. Disney organized one at El Capitan in Los Angeles, and built a fun house next door featuring the characters. Jobs did not attend and instead rented the Regency, a similar theater in San Francisco, and held his own premiere the next night. Instead of Tom Hanks and Steve Martin, the guests were Silicon Valley celebrities, such as Larry Ellison and Andy Grove. The dueling premieres highlighted a festering issue between the companies: whether Toy Story was a Disney or a Pixar movie.[63] "The audience appeared to be captivated by the film," wrote David Price in his 2008 book The Pixar Touch. "Adult-voiced sobs could be heard during the quiet moments after Buzz Lightyear fell and lay broken on the stairway landing."[64] Toy Story opened on 2,281 screens in in the United States on November 22, 1995 (before later expanding to 2,574 screens).[64] It was paired alongside a rerelease of a Roger Rabbit short called Rollercoaster Rabbit, while select prints contained The Adventures of Andr and Wally B..The film was also shown at the Berlin Film Festival out of competition from February 15 to 26, 1996.[65] Elsewhere, the film opened in March 1996.[58]Marketing for the film included $20million spent by Disney for advertising as well as advertisers such as Burger King, Pepsico, Coca-Cola, and Payless ShoeSource paying $125million in tied promotions for the film.[66] A marketing consultant reflected on the promotion: "This will be a killer deal. How can a kid, sitting through a one-and-a-half-hour movie with an army of recognizable toy characters, not want to own one?"[67] Despite this, the consumer products arm of Disney was slow to see the potential of Toy Story early on.[58] When the Thanksgiving release date was announced in January 1995, many toy companies were accustomed to having eighteen months to two years of runway time, and passed on the project. In February 1995, Disney took the idea to Toy Fair, a toy industry trade show in New York. There, a Toronto-based company with a factory based in China, Thinkaway Toys, became interested. Although Thinkaway was a small player in the industry, mainly producing toy banks in the form of film characters, it was able to scoop up the worldwide master license for Toy Story toys simply because no one else wanted it.[68] Buena Vista Home Video put a trailer for the film on seven million copies of the VHS re-release of Cinderella; the Disney Channel ran a television special on the making of Toy Story; Walt Disney World in Orlando held a daily Toy Story parade at Disney-MGM Studios.[56]It was screenwriter Joss Whedon's idea to incorporate Barbie as a character who would rescue Woody and Buzz in the film's final act.[69] The idea was dropped after Mattel objected and refused to license the toy. Producer Ralph Guggenheim claimed that Mattel did not allow the use of the toy as "They [Mattel] philosophically felt girls who play with Barbie dolls are projecting their personalities onto the doll. If you give the doll a voice and animate it, you're creating a persona for it that might not be every little girl's dream and desire."[38] Hasbro likewise refused to license G.I. Joe (mainly because Sid was going to blow one up), but they did license Mr. Potato Head.[38] The only toy in the movie that was not currently in production was Slinky Dog, which was discontinued since the 1970s. When designs for Slinky were sent to Betty James (Richard James's Wife) she said that Pixar had improved the toy and that it was "cuter" than the original.[70]On October 2, 2009, the film was re-released in Disney Digital 3-D.[71] The film was also released with Toy Story 2 as a double feature for a two-week run[72] which was extended due to its success.[73][74] In addition, the film's second sequel, Toy Story 3, was also released in the 3-D format.[71] Lasseter commented on the new 3-D re-release:"The Toy Story films and characters will always hold a very special place in our hearts and we're so excited to be bringing this landmark film back for audiences to enjoy in a whole new way thanks to the latest in 3-D technology. With Toy Story 3 shaping up to be another great adventure for Buzz, Woody and the gang from Andy's room, we thought it would be great to let audiences experience the first two films all over again and in a brand new way."[75]Translating the film into 3-D involved revisiting the original computer data and virtually placing a second camera into each scene, creating left-eye and right-eye views needed to achieve the perception of depth.[76] Unique to computer animation, Lasseter referred to this process as "digital archaeology."[76] The process took four months, as well as an additional six months for the two films to add the 3-D. The lead stereographer Bob Whitehill oversaw this process and sought to achieve an effect that affected the emotional storytelling of the film:"When I would look at the films as a whole, I would search for story reasons to use 3-D in different ways. In 'Toy Story, for instance, when the toys were alone in their world, I wanted it to feel consistent to a safer world. And when they went out to the human world, that's when I really blew out the 3-D to make it feel dangerous and deep and overwhelming."[76]Unlike other countries, the United Kingdom received the films in 3-D as separate releases. Toy Story was released on October 2, 2009. Toy Story 2 was instead released January 22, 2010.[77] The re-release performed well at the box office, opening with $12,500,000 in its opening weekend, placing at the third position after Zombieland and Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs.[78] The double feature grossed $30,714,027 in its five-week release.[78]"Yes, we worry about what the critics say. Yes, we worry about what the opening box office is going to be. Yes, we worry about what the final box office is going to be. But really, the whole point why we do what we do is to entertain our audiences. The greatest joy I get as a filmmaker is to slip into an audience for one of our movies anonymously, and watch people watch our film. Because people are 100 percent honest when they're watching a movie. And to see the joy on people's faces, to see people really get into our films...to me is the greatest reward I could possibly get."Ever since its original 1995 release, Toy Story received universal acclaim from critics; Review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes (which gave the movie an "Extremely Fresh" rating) reports that 100% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 74 reviews, with an average score of 9/10. The critical consensus is: As entertaining as it is innovative, Toy Story kicked off Pixar's unprecedented run of quality pictures, reinvigorating animated film in the process. The film is Certified Fresh.[7] At the website Metacritic, which utilizes a normalized rating system, the film earned a "universal acclaim" level rating of 92/100 based on 16reviews by mainstream critics.[6] Reviewers hailed the film for its computer animation, voice cast, and ability to appeal to numerous age groups.Leonard Klady of Variety commended the animation's "... razzle-dazzle technique and unusual look. The camera loops and zooms in a dizzying fashion that fairly takes one's breath away."[80] Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times compared the film's innovative animation to Disney's Who Framed Roger Rabbit, saying "Both movies take apart the universe of cinematic visuals, and put it back together again, allowing us to see in a new way."[81] Due to the film's animation, Richard Corliss of TIME claimed that it was "... the year's most inventive comedy."[82]The voice cast was also praised by various critics. Susan Wloszczyna of USA Today approved of the selection of Hanks and Allen for the lead roles.[83] Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times stated that "Starting with Tom Hanks, who brings an invaluable heft and believability to Woody, Toy Story is one of the best voiced animated features in memory, with all the actors ... making their presences strongly felt."[84] Several critics also recognized the film's ability to appeal to various age groups, specifically children and adults.[81][85] Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote: "It has the purity, the ecstatic freedom of imagination, that's the hallmark of the greatest children's films. It also has the kind of spring-loaded allusive prankishness that, at times, will tickle adults even more than it does kids."[86]In 1995, Toy Story was named eighth in TIME's list of the best ten films of 1995.[87] In 2011, TIME named it one of "The 25 All-TIME Best Animated Films".[88] It also ranks at number 99 in Empire magazines list of the 500 Greatest Films of All Time, and as the highest ranked animated movie.[89]In 2003, the Online Film Critics Society ranked the film as the greatest animated film of all time.[90] In 2007, the Visual Effects Society named the film 22nd in its list of the "Top 50 Most Influential Visual Effects Films of All Time".[91] In 2005 the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry, one of five films to be selected in its first year of eligibility.[92] The film is ranked ninety-ninth on the AFI's list of the hundred greatest American films of all time.[93][94][95] It was one of only two animated films on the list, the other being Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs. It was also sixth best in the animation genre on AFI's 10 Top 10.Director Terry Gilliam would praise the film as "a work of genius. It got people to understand what toys are about. They're true to their own character. And that's just brilliant. It's got a shot that's always stuck with me, when Buzz Lightyear discovers he's a toy. He's sitting on this landing at the top of the staircase and the camera pulls back and he's this tiny little figure. He was this guy with a massive ego two seconds before... and it's stunning. I'd put that as one of my top ten films, period."[96]Prior to the film's release, executive producer and Apple Computer founder Steve Jobs stated "If Toy Story is a modest hitsay $75million at the box officewe'll [Pixar and Disney] both break even. If it gets $100million, we'll both make money. But if it's a real blockbuster and earns $200million or so at the box office, we'll make good money, and Disney will make a lot of money." Upon its release on November 22, 1995, Toy Story managed to gross more than $350million worldwide.[55] Disney chairman Michael Eisner stated "I don't think either side thought Toy Story would turn out as well as it has. The technology is brilliant, the casting is inspired, and I think the story will touch a nerve. Believe me, when we first agreed to work together, we never thought their first movie would be our 1995 holiday feature, or that they could go public on the strength of it."[55] Toy Story's first five days of domestic release (on Thanksgiving weekend), earned the film $39,071,176.[97] The film placed first in the weekend's box office with $29,140,617.[1] The film maintained its number one position at the domestic box office for the following two weekends. Toy Story was the highest grossing domestic film in 1995, beating Batman Forever and Apollo 13 (also starring Tom Hanks).[98] At the time of its release, it was the third highest grossing animated film after The Lion King (1994) and Aladdin (1992).[26] When not considering inflation, Toy Story is 96th on the list of the highest grossing domestic films of all time.[99] The film had gross receipts of $191,796,233 in the U.S. and Canada and $170,162,503 in international markets for a total of $361,958,736 worldwide.[1] At the time of its release, the film ranked 17th highest grossing film (unadjusted) in domestic money, and worldwide it was the 21st highest grossing film.The film won and was nominated for various other awards including a Kids' Choice Award, MTV Movie Award, and a BAFTA Award, among others. John Lasseter received an Academy Special Achievement Award in 1996 "for the development and inspired application of techniques that have made possible the first feature-length computer-animated film."[100] The film was nominated for three Academy Awards, two to Randy Newman for Best MusicOriginal Song, for "You've Got a Friend in Me", and Best MusicOriginal Musical or Comedy Score.[101] It was also nominated for Best WritingScreenplay Written for the Screen for the work by Joel Cohen, Pete Docter, John Lasseter, Joe Ranft, Alec Sokolow, Andrew Stanton, and Joss Whedon making Toy Story the first animated film to be nominated for a writing award.[101]Toy Story won eight Annie Awards, including "Best Animated Feature". Animator Pete Docter, director John Lasseter, musician Randy Newman, producers Bonnie Arnold and Ralph Guggenheim, production designer Ralph Eggleston, and writers Joel Cohen, Alec Sokolow, Andrew Stanton, and Joss Whedon all won awards for "Best Individual Achievement" in their respective fields for their work on the film. The film also won "Best Individual Achievement" in technical achievement.[102]Toy Story was nominated for two Golden Globes, one for "Best Motion PictureComedy/Musical", and one for "Best Original SongMotion Picture" for Randy Newman's "You've Got a Friend in Me".[103] At both the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards and the Kansas City Film Critics Circle, the film won "Best Animated Film".[104][105] Toy Story is also among the top ten in the BFI list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14, and the highest placed (at #99) animated film in Empire's list of "500 Greatest Movie of All Time".[106] In 2005 Toy Story, along with Toy Story 2 was voted the 4th greatest cartoon in Channel 4's 100 Greatest Cartoons poll, behind The Simpsons, Tom and Jerry and South Park.Toy Story was released on VHS and Laserdisc on October 29, 1996, with no bonus material. In the first week of release VHS rentals totaled $5.1million, debuting Toy Story as the number one video for the week.[107] Over 21.5million VHS copies were sold in the first year.[108] Disney released a deluxe edition widescreen LaserDisc 4-disc box set on December 18, 1996. On January 11, 2000, it was released on VHS in the Gold Classic Collection series with the bonus short, Tin Toy, which sold two million copies.[108] Its first DVD release was on October 17, 2000, in a two-pack with Toy Story 2. This release was later available individually on March 20, 2001. Also on October 17, 2000, a 3-disc "Ultimate Toy Box" set was released, featuring Toy Story, Toy Story 2, and a third disc of bonus materials.[108] The DVD two-pack, The Ultimate Toy Box set, the Gold Classic Collection VHS and DVD and the original DVD were put in the Disney Vault. On September 6, 2005, a 2-disc "10th Anniversary Edition" was released featuring much of the bonus material from the "Ultimate Toy Box", including a retrospective special with John Lasseter, a home theater mix, as well as a new picture.[109] This DVD went back in the Disney Vault on January 31, 2009, along with Toy Story 2. The 10th Anniversary release was the last version of Toy Story to be released before taken out of the Disney Vault lineup, along with Toy Story 2. Also on September 6, 2005, a bare-bones UMD of Toy Story was released for the Sony PlayStation Portable.The film was available on Blu-ray for the first time in a Special Edition Combo Pack which included two discs, one Blu-ray copy of the movie, and another DVD copy of the movie. This combo-edition was released on March 23, 2010, along with its sequel.[110] There was a DVD-only re-release on May 11, 2010.[111] Another "Ultimate Toy Box," packaging the Combo Pack with those of both sequels, became available on November 2, 2010. On November 1, 2011, along with the DVD and Blu-ray release of Cars 2, Toy Story and the other two films were released on each Blu-ray/Blu-ray 3D/DVD/Digital Copy combo pack (4 discs each for the first two films, and 5 for the third film). They were also be released on Blu-ray 3D in a complete trilogy box set.Toy Story had a large impact on the film industry with its innovative computer animation. After the film's debut, various industries were interested in the technology used for the film. Graphics chip makers desired to compute imagery similar to the film's animation for personal computers; game developers wanted to learn how to replicate the animation for video games; and robotics researchers were interested in building artificial intelligence into their machines that compared to the lifelike characters in the film.[112] Various authors have also compared the film to an interpretation of Don Quixote as well as humanism.[113][114] In addition, Toy Story left an impact with its catchphrase "To Infinity and Beyond", sequels, and software, among others.Buzz Lightyear's classic line "To Infinity and Beyond" has seen usage not only on T-shirts, but among philosophers and mathematical theorists as well.[115][116][117] Lucia Hall of The Humanist linked the film's plot to an interpretation of humanism. She compared the phrase to "All this and heaven, too", indicating one who is happy with a life on Earth as well as having an afterlife.[114] In 2008, during STS-124 astronauts took an action figure of Buzz Lightyear into space on the Discovery Space Shuttle as part of an educational experience for students while stressing the catchphrase. The action figure was used for experiments in zero-g.[118] It was reported in 2008 that a father and son had continually repeated the phrase to help them keep track of each other while treading water for 15 hours in the Atlantic Ocean.[119] The phrase occurs in the lyrics of Beyonce's 2008 song "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)", during the bridge.Toy Story has spawned two sequels: Toy Story 2 (1999) and Toy Story 3 (2010). Initially, the first sequel to Toy Story was going to be a direct-to-video release, with development beginning in 1996.[120] However, after the cast from Toy Story returned and the story was considered to be better than that of a direct-to-video release, it was announced in 1998 that the sequel would see a theatrical release.[121] The sequel saw the return of the majority of the voice cast from Toy Story, and the film focuses on rescuing Woody after he is stolen at a yard sale. The film was equally well received by critics, earning a rare 100% approval rating at Rotten Tomatoes, based on 125 reviews.[122] At Metacritic, the film earned a favorable rating of 88/100 based on 34 reviews.[123] The film's widest release was 3,257 theaters and it grossed $485,015,179 worldwide, becoming the second-most successful animated film after The Lion King at the time of its release.[124][125]Toy Story 3 centers on the toys being accidentally donated to a day-care center when their owner Andy is preparing to go to college.[126][127] Again the majority of the cast from the prior two films returned. It was the first film in the franchise to be released in 3-D for its first run, though the first two films, which were originally released in 2-D, were re-released in 3-D in 2009 as a double feature.[126] Like its predecessors, Toy Story 3 received enormous critical acclaim, earning a 99% approval rating from Rotten Tomatoes.[128] It also grossed more than $1 billion worldwide, making it the highest-grossing animated film to date.[129]In November 1996, the Disney on Ice: Toy Story ice show opened which featured the voices of the cast as well as the music by Randy Newman.[130] In April 2008, the Disney Wonder cruise ship launched Toy Story: The Musical shows on its cruises.[131]Toy Story also led to a spin-off direct-to-video animated film, Buzz Lightyear of Star Command: The Adventure Begins, as well as the animated television series Buzz Lightyear of Star Command.[132] The film and series followed Buzz Lightyear and his friends at Star Command as they uphold justice across the galaxy. Although the film was criticized for not using the same animation as in Toy Story and Toy Story 2, it sold three million VHS and DVDs in its first week of release.[133][134] The series ran for 65 episodes.There were also short films before Cars 2 titled Hawaiian Vacation, centering around Barbie and Ken on vacation in Bonnie's room, and the The Muppets entitled Small Fry, centering on Buzz being left in a fast-food restaurant.Disney's Animated Storybook: Toy Story and Disney's Activity Center: Toy Story were released for Windows and Mac.[135] Disney's Animated Storybook: Toy Story was the best selling software title of 1996, selling over 500,000 copies.[136] Two console video games were released for the film: the Toy Story video game, for the Sega Genesis, Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Game Boy, and PC as well as Toy Story Racer, for the PlayStation (which contains elements from Toy Story 2).[137] Pixar created original animations for all of the games, including fully animated sequences for the PC titles.Toy Story had a large promotion prior to its release, leading to numerous tie-ins with the film including images on food packaging.[67] A variety of merchandise was released during the film's theatrical run and its initial VHS release including toys, clothing, and shoes, among other things.[138] When an action figure for Buzz Lightyear and Sheriff Woody was created it was initially ignored by retailers. However, after over 250,000 figures were sold for each character prior to the film's release, demand continued to expand, eventually reaching over 25million units sold by 2007.[79]Toy Story and its sequels have inspired multiple attractions at the theme parks of Walt Disney World and Disneyland: November 22, 1995(1995-11-22)1 Plot2 Cast

2.1 Cast notes

2.1 Cast notes3 Production

3.1 Development
3.2 Writing
3.3 Casting
3.4 Production shutdown
3.5 Animation
3.6 Music
3.7 Editing and pre-release

3.1 Development3.2 Writing3.3 Casting3.4 Production shutdown3.5 Animation3.6 Music3.7 Editing and pre-release4 Soundtrack5 Release

5.1 Marketing
5.2 3-D re-release
5.3 Reception
5.4 Box office performance
5.5 Accolades
5.6 Home media

5.1 Marketing5.2 3-D re-release5.3 Reception5.4 Box office performance5.5 Accolades5.6 Home media6 Impact and legacy

6.1 "To Infinity and Beyond"
6.2 Sequels, shows, and spin-offs
6.3 Software and merchandise
6.4 Theme park attractions

6.1 "To Infinity and Beyond"6.2 Sequels, shows, and spin-offs6.3 Software and merchandise6.4 Theme park attractions7 Notes8 References9 External links2.1 Cast notes3.1 Development3.2 Writing3.3 Casting3.4 Production shutdown3.5 Animation3.6 Music3.7 Editing and pre-release5.1 Marketing5.2 3-D re-release5.3 Reception5.4 Box office performance5.5 Accolades5.6 Home media6.1 "To Infinity and Beyond"6.2 Sequels, shows, and spin-offs6.3 Software and merchandise6.4 Theme park attractionsTom Hanks as Woody, a cowboy pull string dollTim Allen as Buzz Lightyear, a Space Ranger dollDon Rickles as Mr. Potato Head, a potato shaped doll with put together pieces on his bodyJim Varney as Slinky Dog, a slink toyWallace Shawn as Rex, a cowardly green Tyrannosaurus RexJohn Ratzenberger as Hamm, a piggy bankAnnie Potts as Bo Peep, a shepherdess and Woody's love interestJohn Morris as Andy Davis, the young boy who owns all the toysErik von Detten as Sid Phillips, Andy's former next door neighbour, who destroys toys for his own amusementLaurie Metcalf as Andy's MomR. Lee Ermey as Sarge, a green plastic figure soldierSarah Freeman as Hannah Phillips, Sid's sisterPenn Jillette as TV AnnouncerJack Angel as Shark/Rocky GibraltarGreg Berg as Minesweeper SoldierDebi Derryberry as Squeeze Toy Aliens/Pizza Planet IntercomMickie McGowan as Sid's MomRyan O'Donohue as kid in Buzz Lightyear commercialJeff Pidgeon as Squeeze Toy Aliens/Mr. Spell/RobotPhil Proctor as Pizza Planet guard/bowling announcerJoe Ranft as LennyAndrew Stanton as Buzz Lightyear commercial chorusNon-speaking characters include Scud, Barrel of Monkeys, Etch A Sketch, Snake, Clown, and Buster.Buzz Lightyear's Space Ranger Spin at the Magic Kingdom casts theme park guests as cadets in Buzz's Space Ranger Corps. Guests ride through various scenes featuring Emperor Zurg's henchmen, firing "laser canons" at their Z symbols, scoring points for each hit.[139]Buzz Lightyear's Astro Blasters at Disneyland, is very similar to Space Ranger Spin, except that the laser canons are hand-held rather than mounted to the ride vehicle.[140]Buzz Lightyear's Astroblasters at DisneyQuest in Walt Disney World, despite the nearly identical name to the Disneyland attraction, is a bumper car style attraction in which guests compete against each other not only by ramming their ride vehicles into each other, but also by firing "asteroids" (playground balls) at each other.[141]Toy Story Mania at both Disney's Hollywood Studios in Walt Disney World and Disney's California Adventure Park in Disneyland features a series of interactive carnival-type games hosted by the Toy Story characters. Guests ride in vehicles while wearing 3D glasses, and using a pull-string canon to launch virtual rings, darts, baseballs, etc. Disney announced an update to the attraction to add characters from Toy Story 3 several months before the film's release date.[142][143]World of Color at Disney California Adventure is a large night time water and light show. Some of the scenes projected on the water screens feature animation from the Toy Story films.[144]Toy Story Playland at Disneyland Paris and Hong Kong Disneyland, opening in August 2010 and 2011 respectively. The area is designed to create the illusion of "shrinking the guest" down to the size of a toy, and to play in Andy's backyard in several themed rides.[145]Toy Story Character Greetings are located at almost all Disney Parks. Three of the main characters, Buzz Lightyear, Woody and Jesse are normally the characters you would meet. Sometimes you can even meet Bullseye, the Green Army Men and Mr. Potato Head.Price, David (2008). The Pixar Touch. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN0-307-26575-7.Official Pixar websiteOfficial Disney websiteToy Story at the Internet Movie DatabaseToy Story at the Big Cartoon DataBaseToy Story at AllRoviToy Story at Rotten TomatoesToy Story at MetacriticToy Story at Box Office MojoYankee Doodle Dandy is a 1942 American biographical musical film about George M. Cohan, known as "The Man Who Owns Broadway".[2] It stars James Cagney, Joan Leslie, Walter Huston, and Richard Whorf, and features Irene Manning, George Tobias, Rosemary DeCamp and Jeanne Cagney.The movie was written by Robert Buckner and Edmund Joseph, and directed by Michael Curtiz. According to the special edition DVD, significant and uncredited improvements were made to the script by the famous "script doctors," twin brothers Julius J. Epstein and Philip G. Epstein.The song "The Yankee Doodle Boy" (a.k.a. "Yankee Doodle Dandy") was Cohan's trademark piece, a patriotic pastiche drawing from the lyrics and melody of the old Revolutionary War number, "Yankee Doodle". Other Cohan tunes in the movie include "Give My Regards to Broadway", "Harrigan", "Mary's a Grand Old Name", "You're a Grand Old Flag" and "Over There".Cagney was a fitting choice for the role of Cohan since, like Cohan, he was an Irish-American who had been a song-and-dance man early in his career. His unique and seemingly odd presentation style, of half-singing and half-reciting the songs, reflected the style that Cohan himself used. His natural dance style and physique were also a good match for Cohan. Newspapers at the time reported that Cagney intended to consciously imitate Cohan's song-and-dance style, but to play the normal part of the acting in his own style. Although director Curtiz was famous for being a taskmaster, he also gave his actors some latitude, and Cagney and other players improvised a number of "bits of business," as Cagney called them.Although a number of the biographical particulars of the movie are Hollywood-ized fiction (omitting the fact that Cohan divorced and remarried, for example, and taking some liberties with the chronology of Cohan's life), care was taken to make the sets, costumes and dance steps match the original stage presentations. This effort was aided significantly by a former associate of Cohan's, Jack Boyle, who knew the original productions well. Boyle also appeared in the film in some of the dancing groups.Cohan is shown performing as a singing and dancing version of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. The reality of Roosevelt's confinement to a wheelchair due to polio was kept from the general public at the time. In the film, Roosevelt never leaves his chair when meeting Cohan.The movie poster for this film was the first ever produced by noted poster designer Bill Gold. This movie also has an inside joke about movies: when Cohan "retires" in the 1930s and several teenagers (who know nothing about his career) ask him if he had ever been in the movies, he remarks that he had been an actor in the "legitimate theater."Cohan himself served as a consultant during the production of the film. Due to his failing health, his actual involvement in the film was rather limited. However, Cohan did see the film before he died (from cancer) and approved of Cagney's portrayal.[3]In the early days of World War II, Cohan comes out of retirement to star as President Roosevelt in the Rodgers and Hart musical I'd Rather Be Right. On the first night, he is summoned to meet the President at the White House, who presents him with a Congressional Gold Medal (in fact, this happened several years previously). Cohan is overcome and chats with Roosevelt, recalling his early days on the stage. The film flashes back to his supposed birth on July 4, whilst his father is performing on the vaudeville stage.Cohan and his sister join the family act as soon as they can learn to dance, and soon The Four Cohans are performing successfully. But George gets too cocky as he grows up and is blacklisted by theatrical producers for being troublesome. He leaves the act and hawks his songs unsuccessfully around producers. In partnership with another struggling writer, Sam Harris, he finally interests a producer and they are on the road to success. He also marries Mary, a young singer/dancer.As his star ascends, he persuades his now struggling parents to join his act, eventually vesting some of his valuable theatrical properties in their name.Cohan retires, but returns to the stage several times, culminating in the role of the U.S. President. as he leaves the White House, he performs a dance step down the stairs (which Cagney thought up before the scene was filmed and performed with no rehearsal). Outside, he joins a military parade, where the soldiers are singing "Over There." Not knowing that Cohan is the song's composer, they jokingly invite him to join in, which he does.Cast notes:The film nearly doubled the earnings of Captains of the Clouds, Cagney's previous effort, bringing in more than $6 million in rentals to Warner Bros. This made it the biggest box office success in the company's history up to that time. The star earned his contractual $150,000 salary and nearly half a million dollars in profit sharing.[10]The film won Academy Awards for Best Actor in a Leading Role (James Cagney), Best Music, Scoring of a Musical Picture and Best Sound, Recording (Nathan Levinson). It was nominated for Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Walter Huston), Best Director, Best Film Editing for George Amy, Best Picture and Best Writing, Original Story.[11] In 1993, Yankee Doodle Dandy was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".American Film Institute recognitionA popular myth about this movie, or at least a stretching of the truth, was that it was written in response to accusations that James Cagney was a Communist. Supposedly, Cagney learned that he was in danger of being blacklisted for having Communist sympathies, so he decided to make the most jingoistic movie he possibly could and thus clear his name. This myth has its chronology a bit askew, as the McCarthy Era did not begin until the early 1950s. Also, the Second Red Scare did not begin until the late 1940s, well after the film was made. In other versions of this legend, either Robert Buckner or Edmund Joseph were the accused. Cagney was, however, accused of being a Communist in a California grand jury trial in 1940, and this may have had an influence on the story.[12]The DVD specials discuss this story in some detail. Congressman Martin Dies was investigating possible Communist influence in Hollywood in 1940; he in fact had a cordial meeting with Cagney. The actor reassured him that, although he was a liberal and supported Roosevelt's New Deal, he was also a patriot who had nothing to do with Communism. That was the end of it, except that Cagney's producer-brother William saw the Cohan story as a good opportunity to dispel any possible concerns about Cagney's loyalty. It was not written in response to the Dies investigation, as Cohan himself had been shopping his own story around for a while before Jack Warner bought the rights, and Cohan retained final approval on all aspects of the film.As the DVD also points out, production on the film was just a few days old when the Attack on Pearl Harbor occurred. The film's cast and crew resolved to make an uplifting, patriotic film. It was timed to open around Memorial Day in 1942, and was regarded as having achieved its goal in grand fashion.Yankee Doodle Dandy was adapted as a radio play on the October 19, 1942 broadcast of The Screen Guild Theater, starring James Cagney with Rita Hayworth and Betty Grable.In 1986, Yankee Doodle Dandy was the first computer-colorized film released by entrepreneur Ted Turner.June 6, 1942(1942-06-06)1 Background and production2 Synopsis3 Cast4 Reception

4.1 Box office
4.2 Awards and honors

4.1 Box office4.2 Awards and honors5 Patriotic themes6 Adaptations to Other Media7 Colorization8 References9 External links4.1 Box office4.2 Awards and honorsJames Cagney as George M. CohanJoan Leslie as Mary CohanEddie Foy, Jr. as Eddie FoyWalter Huston as Jerry CohanRichard Whorf as Sam HarrisIrene Manning as Fay TempletonGeorge Tobias as DietzRosemary DeCamp as Nellie CohanJeanne Cagney as Josie CohanFrances Langford as Nora BayesGeorge Barbier as ErlangerS. Z. Sakall as SchwabWalter Catlett as Theatre ManagerMinor Watson as AlbeeChester Clute as GoffOdette Myrtil as Madame BartholdiDouglas Croft as George M. Cohan, age 13Patsy Parsons as Josie Cohan, age 12James Cagney reprised the role of George M. Cohan in the movie The Seven Little Foys (1955), but agreed only on the condition that he receive no money  he did the film as a tribute to Eddie Foy. In Yankee Doodle Dandy, Eddie Foy, Jr. played the role of his own father. In The Seven Little Foys Bob Hope portrayed Foy; Charley Foy served as a narrator.Actress Jeanne Cagney, who played the part of Cohan's sister, was James Cagney's real-life sister.[4] Cagney's brother, William Cagney, was the Associate Producer of the film.[5]Rosemary DeCamp, who played the mother of George M. Cohan, played by James Cagney, was, in fact, 11 years younger than Cagney.[6]President Franklin D. Roosevelt was played by Captain Jack Young, a lookalike who is seen only from the back. An impressionist, Art Gilmore, provided the voice of Roosevelt, uncredited.[7]Uncredited cast members include Eddie Acuff, Murray Alper, Ward Bond, Walter Brooke, Georgia Carroll, Glen Cavender, Spencer Charters, Wallis Clark, William B. Davidson, Ann Doran, Tom Dugan, Bill Edwards, Frank Faylen, Pat Flaherty, James Flavin, William Forrest, William Gillespie, Joe Gray, Creighton Hale, John Hamilton, Harry Hayden, Stuart Holmes, William Hopper, Eddie Kane, Fred Kelsey, Vera Lewis, Audrey Long, Hank Mann, Frank Mayo, Lon McCallister, Edward McWade, George Meeker, Dolores Moran, Charles Morton, Jack Mower, Paul Panzer, Francis Pierlot, Clinton Rosemond, Syd Saylor, Frank Sully, Dick Wessel, Leo White and Dave Willock.[8]1998: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies - #1002004: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Songs - #71

The Yankee Doodle Boy

The Yankee Doodle Boy2005: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movie Quotes:

"My mother thanks you. My father thanks you. My sister thanks you. And I thank you." - #97

"My mother thanks you. My father thanks you. My sister thanks you. And I thank you." - #972006: AFI's 100 Years of Musicals - #182006: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Cheers - #882007: AFI's 100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) - #98The Yankee Doodle Boy"My mother thanks you. My father thanks you. My sister thanks you. And I thank you." - #97Yankee Doodle Dandy at the Internet Movie DatabaseYankee Doodle Dandy at the TCM Movie DatabaseYankee Doodle Dandy at AllRovi